Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

12

Constance M. Bertka

in the early Christian church whose work is foundational for Christian theology,
offers a view of creation that allows for a gradualist account of life’s origin and
diversity. McMullin argues that Augustine’s view of creation is also supportive of
a natural transition from non-life to life on early Earth. He finds in Augustine’s
work an alternative to the divine intervention that  Intelligent Design advocates
call for. Unfortunately, as  McMullin notes, Augustine’s views on creation were
not supported by Church authorities and also fell victim to the tendency for literal
interpretation of the Bible that flourished with the Protestant reformation.
The origin-of-life discussion in this volume concludes with the thoughts of a
contemporary theologian,  Deane-Drummond, whose contribution reviews the
theological themes associated with origin-of-life and ethical issues raised by both
origin and future of life research. She concludes by arguing that Theology has a
distinctive contribution to make when considering future discoveries and research.
Her work outlines why naturalistic explanations are not threatening to theists and
how theological ethics can particularly encourage a reflection on our responsibility
to future generations.
Perhaps the time is right for Augustine’s views on creation to be revisited and
for the views of theologians that embrace and welcome naturalistic explanations
of life’s origin and diversity to be heard both within and outside of the church. If
this were to occur, then origin-of-life research might be more broadly described as
a challenging but fruitful frontier, rather than a weak and controversial point in a
scientific narrative. And as we approach a clearer understanding of the origin of the
first cell, perhaps duplicating a possible scenario in the laboratory, scientists will, I
believe, benefit from the encouragement and insight of theologians equipped with
an understanding and acceptance of the scientific worldview, yet ready to offer the
insights of a different tradition.
1.4  Extent of life
Are we alone? Dialogue participants were asked to consider this question with a
focus on searching for and discovering extraterrestrial (ET) non-intelligent life,
specifically  microbial life, either on a planetary body within our  solar system or
one beyond our solar system. The scientific contributions to this part describe how
life on Earth can provide a model for searching for life elsewhere, and the status
of our search for habitable extrasolar planets. A historical perspective that traces
how the philosophical, ethical, and theological issues associated with ET life have
been raised and addressed through time is included, as is a contribution that categorizes the main philosophical issues associated with the search and discovery
of ET life. Unique to this part of the volume, there is also a specific discussion of
policy issues that need to be addressed in regards to searching for and discovering

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

13

ET life. The final contribution to this part explores if, and how, views of God will
change if ET life is discovered.
Where else in the  solar system might we look for life?  Rothschild reminds us
how the possibilities have been expanded by both our growing understanding of
life’s tenacity on Earth, gleaned from studies of life in extreme environments, and
by the exploration of our  solar system. The  search for life is guided, by necessity,
by what we know about terrestrial life. Terrestrial life is carbon and water based,
diverse, dominated by microbes and can survive in extreme environmental conditions. Extrapolating from the terrestrial life model Mars, for example, is judged one
likely candidate for harboring existing or extant ET life because of the evidence for
liquid water on its surface in the past, and likely underground in the present.  Pilcher
and  Lissauer’s contribution outlines another major development in the search for
ET life, the hundreds of planets now known to be orbiting stars other than our
own Sun, and the technical advances currently taking place that will expand the
ability of astronomers to detect Earth-sized planets in the habitable zones of their
parent stars (distances at which liquid water at the surface of the planets is plausible)  . Pilcher and Lissauer suggest that in the next couple of decades we will know
whether planets like these are common or rare. We may even be able to search for
biosignatures, evidence of life, in their atmospheres.
The possibilities of exploration and research currently underway are certainly
exciting, and I imagine they will naturally result in a renewed interest in pondering
humanity’s place in the universe, but in this volume  Dick reminds us that throughout history the philosophical, ethical, and theological issues associated with ET
life have been considered. He notes that the possibility of other worlds, though not
necessarily raising challenges for theism in general, does pose interesting questions for specific Christian doctrines. He argues that one result of Darwin’s work
was that these discussions were broadened to include the idea of cosmic evolution,
and a universe characterized by its distinct orientation towards biology. He suggests the latter idea, dubbed the  “biological universe,” has attained the status of a
worldview.
In categorizing the philosophical issues raised by the search for ET life,  Lupisella
also notes the impact on worldviews the search may produce. Will the search confirm a “biological,” or in Lupisella’s terminology “deliberate,” universe or will
we conclude that life is a rare and random event? Under these different scenarios
how will humanity’s views on value and meaning fare? Other philosophical issues
he highlights include all of the questions raised by the fact that the exploration
occurs in the light of only one known data point – life on Earth. For example,
if we discover ET life in the solar system how will we discern whether or not it
represents an independent origin of life? Another category of philosophical issues
noted by Lupisella , and covered in greater detail in the final part of this volume, is

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

14

Constance M. Bertka

the ethical considerations due to ET life, specifically microbial life. Where is our
“prime directive”?
The “prime directive” or policy issues, are specifically noted in  Race’s
­contribution to this volume. Race outlines how the different types of potential
discoveries will in fact require different types of policies. For example, the discovery of intelligent life rather than microbial life, or the discovery of a planet that
could potentially be habitable by life as we know it, would most certainly call for
different types of policies to be put into practice. Unfortunately, she notes that the
 science and technology are far ahead of current policies, which are focused largely
on issues of  cross-contamination and protecting future scientific exploration.
The final contribution to this part of the volume turns again to the question of philosophical issues, with a specific focus on theology that is framed by
the question – “How will our views of God change if we discover ET life?” To
answer this question  Crysdale reviews the theological issues raised by an evolving universe, noting that the challenges posed by astrobiology are related to issues
surrounding evolution. Ideas of divine  determinism and intervention, as well as
a view of humanity as the apex of meaning, have to be reconsidered. She offers
an example of a revised classical theism that accepts both continuity and novelty in God . Crysdale concludes her contribution with a reminder that humanity lives within an  ethic of risk, not control, and this reality should inform our
exploration.
The dominant motif of this discussion is that the questions, particularly the
philosophical and theological ones, raised by the search for and potential discovery
of ET microbial life are not necessarily new, but there is a renewed urgency to consider the possible answers. Scientific and technological advancements are such that
we are cycling closer than we have ever been before to discovering whether or not
ET life exists. At minimum the question has shifted from one of speculation to one
that has hope of being tested empirically. The proximity of an answer also heightens the need for sustaining an ethical and policy discussion that extends beyond a
consideration of protecting future scientific discoveries. The final part of this volume provides insight into the types of topics such a discussion will encompass.
1.5  Future of life
Where are we going? Beyond understanding the history of life and the expanse of
life, astrobiology is also concerned with the next chapter in life’s story, both here
on Earth and possibly other planetary bodies. Questions that could fall under the
future of life topic are numerous, but the works collected in this volume specifically address one: is planetary  ecosynthesis on Mars, commonly referred to as
 terraforming, technologically feasible, and if so what are the ethical issues raised

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

15

by this possibility? This part of the volume includes a description of the suitability
of Mars for supporting either  transported terrestrial life or indigenous Martian
life, and the technological steps that would be necessary to create a sustained biosphere on Mars. This introduction is followed by the presentation of three ethical
frameworks for considering whether or not what might be done should be done.
One framework explicitly draws on perspectives from the Christian tradition to
consider these options and the other two are secular in nature. This final part of the
volume also includes a contribution that considers how the role that stories play in
Asian religions can offer new insight on all three astrobiology topics: the origin,
extent, and future of life.
 McKay begins this part of the volume by making a compelling argument that,
given current technology and the natural resources available on the planet, Mars
could be warmed, in about 100 years, to support a biosphere. He draws reference
to a fact that we have recently become all too painfully familiar with – humans
know how to increase the temperature of a planet and have unintentionally done
just that to our own. The biosphere McKay is referring to, however, is not one that
could support human life, but one that is similar to the biosphere that existed on
Earth prior to the rise of O2. Planetary  ecosynthesis of this nature on Mars is not
limited to the realm of science fiction. McKay then goes on to argue that utilitarian and intrinsic worth ethical arguments would both support a decision to move
forward with  ecosynthesis on Mars. Intrinsic worth arguments that include valuing
the diversity of life support an argument that life should be encouraged to thrive on
Mars, but indigenous life gets first priority. As McKay points out, this conclusion
will place very specific demands on guidelines for conducting the current exploration of Mars.
 Smith takes exception to  McKay’s use of intrinsic value arguments to encourage planetary  ecosynthesis on Mars. He recognizes that it is common practice in
environmental ethics to extend intrinsic value beyond humans, but questions what
criteria are used to distinguish between an entity that possesses intrinsic value and
one that does not. He argues that defining these criteria is essential and offers one
solution, a “ratio-centric” approach. In this system the ability to reason is the defining criterion by which intrinsic value is assigned. For the sake of clarity, note that
this assignment can be based on membership of a larger group and is not dependent
on individual merit, i.e. mentally impaired individuals are not excluded as they are
members of humanity. Smith suggests that having such a specific criterion in place
will result in a “clear mechanism” for decision making . This does not mean that
Smith is opposed on ethical grounds to encouraging life, either terrestrial or indigenous, to thrive on Mars, but that he is opposed to using a process to reach a decision on this matter that depends on intrinsic value being assigned to non-rational
entities in the absence of a defining criterion.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

16

Constance M. Bertka

 Randolph, drawing on the Christian tradition, offers an alternative to using the
ability to reason as the criterion for assigning intrinsic value. He begins his chapter
by asking why a specifically Christian perspective on the issue is pertinent at all,
and answers in part from a pragmatic standpoint that I find persuasive. Christians
represent a significant proportion of the US population and the astrobiology community would do well to understand their perspectives. Randolph is not suggesting,
however, that this is the only perspective that deserves consideration and in fact
argues for the value of inviting a diverse collection of religious views to the discussion. The main point of his essay though is to present a specifically  Christian ethical framework. He accomplishes this by emphasizing two themes in scripture that
he suggests should be used as guides for contemporary thought. The first is that
God has a preferential option for life and the second is that although all of life has
intrinsic value, humanity alone has been entrusted with a responsibility to serve all
of nature. Using these themes as the foundation, his contribution then explores the
protections due to Earth life, and ET life (with a focus on microbial life), and the
ethical questions raised by the possibility of planetary  ecosynthesis on Mars.
These three contributions together make the point more forcibly than any single one alone could, how important it will be to ensure that an inclusive dialogue
precedes our actions as a space-faring culture. The ethical frameworks presented
by  McKay,  Smith, and Randolph  could all be used to argue for planetary  ecosynthesis on Mars. The possibility of the same outcome is intriguing, but in my
opinion less important than the reality that each framework has the potential to
draw our attention to the potential consequences of our actions, or inactions, that
we might have previously ignored if not for the insights of traditions beyond our
own. Technological advances will continue to guarantee that we face new choices.
I believe we stand better equipped to respond to these choices if we are also challenged to move beyond the comfort of our own frameworks. The final contribution
to this volume, a chapter that describes Asian religious perspectives on storytelling,
provides a concrete example of how common Western motifs for the relationship
between science and religion are called into question by Asian perspectives.
 Cho argues that science and religion are often described as telling different stories about the world and that a Western perspective calls for the proper relationship
between these two stories to be defined. Beyond adopting a view of inherent conflict between the two stories, she argues that the most common Western responses
are to describe them as either complementary stories, where each is needed to
complete the whole, or to seek to integrate the two stories into one. From an Asian
perspective the reality of many stories, without the constraints of either wholeness
or integration, is welcomed as it provides an opportunity to draw from a wealth of
stories to choose the most useful for a given context. She encourages us to think
about how the relationship between science and religion, and the consequences

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Astrobiology in a societal context

17

that result from assumptions about that relationship, might be altered if an Asian
perspective was adopted.
1.6  Concluding thoughts
Cho’s  contribution to this volume is a vital reminder that the work presented here
is only a beginning, focused from a pragmatic perspective on Christian theological
responses, but by no means meant to be a conclusive work. The papers collected
here cannot claim to be conclusive as to Christian theological views, let alone other
philosophical, or ethical views, and it was never the intent of this work to approach
that goal. Instead, I hope the contributions collected here will encourage a continued
interest in exploring the work of astrobiology from a multidisciplinary perspective.
I believe that astrobiology as a discipline is particularly burdened, perhaps blessed,
with the responsibility to speak to society at large. After all, humanity itself may
be inherently defined by the ability we collectively possess to ask “Where did we
come from?,” “Are we alone?,” and “Where are we going?” I have found that the
answers proposed in community, especially a diverse one, are far more intriguing
than those I derive on my own. I hope this volume provides a similar experience for
all who are generous enough to consider its content.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

References
  [1]	 J. C. Tarter, et al. A reappraisal of the habitability of planets around M dwarf stars.
Astrobiology, 7 (2007), 30–65.
  [2]	The Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life. Public Divided on Origins of Life
(August 30, 2005), available online at: http://pewforum.org/docs/?DocID=115.
  [3]	 C. Darwin. On the Origin of Species (London: John Murray, 1859).
  [4]	P. L. Berger. Reflections on the sociology of religion today. Sociology of Religion, 62
(2001), 443–454.
  [5]	R. Stark. Secularization, R.I.P. Sociology of Religion, 60 (1999), 249–273.
  [6]	C. D. Bader, K. Dougherty, P. Froese et al. American Piety in the 21st Century: New
Insights to the Depth and Complexity of Religion in the US (September 2006), available online at: www.baylor.edu/content/services/document.php/33304.pdf.
  [7]	L. Woodhead. The desecularization of the world: a global overview. In The
Desecularization of the World: Resurgent Religion and World Politics, ed. P. L. Berger
(Michigan: Ethics and Public Policy Center and Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.,
1999), pp. 1–18.
  [8]	The Gallup Organization. The Spiritual State of the Union: The Role of Spiritual
Commitment in the United States (Washington, DC: Spiritual Enterprise Institute,
2006).
  [9]	S. Bruce. Religion in Modern Britain (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995).
[10]	P. Heelas. The spiritual revolution: from “religion” to “spirituality.” In Religions in
the Modern World, eds. L. Woodhead, P. Fletcher, H. Kawanami, and D. Smith (New
York: Routledge, 2002), pp. 357–377.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

18

Constance M. Bertka

[11]	 J. Heilprin. Evangelicals, scientists join on warming. The Washington Post (January
17, 2007).
[12]	U. Goodenough. The Sacred Depths of Nature (New York: Oxford University Press,
1998).
[13]	 F. J. Ayala, et al. Science, Evolution and Creationism (Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press, 2008).
[14]	 S. J. Gould. Rock of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness of Life (New York:
The Ballantine Publishing Group, 1999).
[15]	 M. Zimmerman. The Clergy Letter Project (2004), http://www.butler.edu/clergyproject/rel_Evol_sun.htm.
[16]	 M. C. Nisbet and C. Mooney. Framing science. Science, 316 (2007), 56.
[17]	 S. Vedantum. Darwin versus God: what the war between evolution and intelligent
design is really about. Washington Post Magazine (February 5, 2006), 8–15, 21–26.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Note added in proof: In March 2009 the results of the 2008 American Religious Identification
Survey (ARIS) were released by the Institute for the Study of Secularism in Society and
Culture at Trinity College (available online at: http://www.americanreligionsurvey-aris.org/
reports/ARIS_Report_2008.pdf). This study, which began with an open-ended question
“What is your religion if any?” and did not present respondents with a list of answers to
choose from, reports that 15% of respondents still fall into the “None” category in 2008.
However, like the Baylor study [6] (see also R. Stark. What Americans Really Believe
(Texas: Baylor University Press, 2008)), the ARIS study does not indicate a significant
rise in atheism since the last survey in 2001 and also reports that non-denominational
Christianity is on the rise. According to the ARIS report, “Another notable finding is the
rise in the preference to self-identify as ‘Born Again’ or ‘Evangelical’ rather than with any
Christian tradition, church or denomination” (p. 6).

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Part I

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Origin of life

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

2
Emergence and the  experimental pursuit
of the origin of life
Robert M. Hazen

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The origin of life involved many, many emergences.
Harold Morowitz [1]

The experimental investigation of life’s origin commenced in earnest more than
a half-century ago with the pioneering work of  Miller [2], who synthesized many
of life’s molecular building blocks under plausible prebiotic conditions. Despite
an initial euphoric sense that the origin mystery would soon be solved, scientists
quickly realized that the transition from a geochemical to a biochemical world
would not easily be deduced by the scientific method.
The great challenge of origins research lies in replicating in a laboratory setting
the extraordinary increase in complexity that is required to evolve from isolated
molecules to a living cell. The principal objective of this review is to describe some
of the efforts by origin-of-life researchers to induce such increases in complexity.
A unifying theme of these studies, and hence a useful organizing framework for
this review, is the principle of emergence – the natural process by which complexity
arises.
2.1  Emergence as a unifying concept
in origins research
The origin of life may be modeled as a sequence of so-called “emergent” events,
each of which added new structure and chemical complexity to the prebiotic
Earth. Observations of numerous everyday phenomena reveal that new patterns
commonly emerge when energy flows through a collection of many interacting
particles [1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life: Philosophical, Ethical, and Theological Perspectives, ed.
Constance M. Bertka. Published by Cambridge University Press. © Cambridge University Press 2009.

21

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

22

Robert M. Hazen

In the words of  John Holland, an influential leader in the study of  emergent
s­ ystems, “It is unlikely that a topic as complicated as emergence will submit
meekly  to a concise definition, and I have no such definition” [6]. Nevertheless,
emergent systems display three distinctive characteristics: (1) they arise from the
interactions of many particles or “agents”; (2) energy flows through those systems
of particles; and (3) they display new patterns or behaviors that are not manifest
by the individual agents. Sand grains, for example, interact under the influence of
wind or waves to form dune and ripple structures [8, 9]. Similarly, ants interact to
form colonies,  neurons interact to produce consciousness, and people interact to
form societies [10, 11] .
The history of the universe may be viewed as a progression of emergent events,
from hydrogen to stars, from stars to the periodic table of chemical elements, from
chemical elements to planets and life, from life to consciousness [1, 7, 12]. The
inexorable stepwise transition from simplicity to emergent complexity is an intrinsic characteristic of the cosmos. In such a pregnant universe, one need not resort to
divine intervention nor to Intelligent Design for life’s origin. Thus, in spite of the
lack of a precise definition, the recognition and description of these varied emergent systems provides an important foundation for origins of life research, for life
is the quintessential emergent phenomenon. From vast collections of interacting
lifeless molecules emerged the first living cell. Understanding the underlying principles governing such emergent systems thus provides insights to our experimental
and theoretical efforts to understand life’s origins.
Framing the origin-of-life problem in terms of emergence is more than simply
providing a new label to parts of the origin story we don’t understand. Emergent
systems share key characteristics that can inform origin models. For example, all
emergent systems, including collections of sand or cells or stars, require a minimum
number of interacting agents before new patterns arise [7, 10]. These systems also
require a source of energy within specific limits – too little energy and no patterning occurs, but too much energy and patterns are destroyed [7, 12]. Experimental
observations of emergent systems also reveal that cycling of energy commonly
enhances emergent complexity [7, 13, 14]. An understanding of these and other
general characteristics of emergent systems thus informs experimental design and
the theoretical analysis of life’s origins.
One key to understanding life’s origin is to recognize the critical role of disequilibrium. Many familiar natural systems lie close to chemical and physical equilibrium
and thus do not display emergent behavior. For example, water gradually cooled
to below the freezing point equilibrates to become a clear chunk of ice, whereas
water gradually heated above the boiling point similarly equilibrates by converting to steam. Dramatically different behavior occurs far from equilibrium. Water
subjected to the strong temperature gradient of a boiling pot displays complex

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

23

turbulent convection [3, 4]. Water flowing downhill in the gravitational gradient
of a river valley interacts with sediments to produce the emergent landforms of
braided streams, meandering rivers, sandbars and deltas. Emergent systems seem
to share a common origin; they arise away from equilibrium when energy flows
through a collection of many interacting agents. Such systems tend spontaneously
to become more ordered and display new, often surprising behaviors. The whole is
more than the simple sum of the parts.
The overarching problem with studying life’s origins is that even the simplest
known life form is vastly more complex than any non-living components that might
have contributed to it. How does such astonishing, intricate complexity arise from
lifeless raw materials? What now appears to us as a yawning divide between nonlife and life reflects the fact that the chemical evolution of life must have occurred
as a stepwise sequence of successively more complex stages of emergence [7].
When modern cells emerged, they quickly consumed virtually all traces of these
earlier stages of chemical evolution.
The challenge, therefore, is to establish a progressive hierarchy of emergent
steps that leads from a prebiotic ocean enriched in organic molecules, to functional
clusters of molecules perhaps self-assembled or arrayed on a mineral surface, to
self-replicating molecular systems that copied themselves from resources in their
immediate environment, to encapsulation and eventually cellular life. The nature
and sequence of these steps may have varied in different environments and we
may never deduce the exact sequence that occurred on the early Earth. Yet many
researchers suspect that the inexorable direction of the chemical path is similar on
any habitable planet or moon [1, 7, 15].
Such a stepwise scenario informs attempts to  define life, because the exact point
at which such a system of gradually increasing complexity becomes “alive” is
intrinsically arbitrary. The evolutionary path to cellular life must have featured a
rich variety of intermediate, complex, self-replicating emergent chemical systems.
Each of those steps represents a distinctive, fundamentally important stage in life’s
molecular synthesis and organization. Each step requires independent experimental study, and perhaps a distinctive name in a taxonomy richer than “living” versus
“non-living” [7, 16].
Ultimately, the key to defining the progressive stages between non-life and life
lies in experimental studies of relevant chemical systems under plausible geochemical environments. The concept of emergence simplifies this experimental endeavor
by reducing an immensely complex historical process to a more comprehensible
succession of measurable steps. Each emergent step provides a tempting focus for
laboratory experimentation and theoretical modeling .
This view of life’s origin, as a stepwise transition from geochemistry to biochemistry, is of special relevance to the search for life elsewhere in the universe.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

24

Robert M. Hazen

Before an effective search can be undertaken, it is necessary to know what to look
for. It is plausible, for example, that Mars, Europa, and other bodies ­progressed
only part way along the chemical path to cellular life. If each emergent step in
life’s origin produces distinctive and measurable isotopic, molecular, and structural signatures in its environment, and if such markers can be identified, then
these chemical features represent important observational targets for planned
space missions. It is possible, for example, that characteristic isotopic, molecular, and structural “fossils” survive only if they have not been eaten by more
advanced cells. We may find that those distinctive molecular structures can serve
as extraterrestrial “abiomarkers” – clear evidence that molecular organization
and evolution never progressed beyond a certain pre-cellular stage. As scientists
search for life elsewhere in the universe, they may be able to characterize extraterrestrial environments according to their degree of emergence along this multi-step
path [7, 17].

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.2   The emergence of biomolecules
The first vital step in life’s emergence on Earth must have been the synthesis and
accumulation of abundant  carbon-based biomolecules. In the beginning, life’s raw
materials consisted of water, rock, and simple volcanic gases – predominantly
carbon dioxide and nitrogen, but with local concentrations of hydrogen, methane,
ammonia, and other species. Decades of experiments have revealed that diverse
suites of organic molecules can emerge from geochemical environments.
The experimental pursuit of geochemical organic synthesis, arguably the best
understood aspect of life’s origin, began a half-century ago with the pioneering
studies of University of Chicago graduate student  Stanley Miller and his distinguished mentor  Harold Urey [1, 18, 19]. Together they established the potential role
of organic synthesis that occurred in Earth’s primitive atmosphere and ocean as
they were subjected to bolts of lightning and the Sun’s intense radiation.
This experimental investigation of life’s origin is a surprisingly recent pursuit.
Two centuries ago most scientists accepted the intuitively reasonable idea that life
is generated spontaneously all around us, all the time. The question of life’s ancient
origins was not asked, at least not in the modern experimental sense [20, 21, 22].
By the early twentieth century many scientists would have agreed that life’s
origins, wherever and however it occurs, depends on three key resources. First, all
known life forms require liquid water. All living cells, even those that survive in
the driest desert ecosystem, are formed largely of water. Surely the first cells arose
in a watery environment.
Life also needs a ready source of energy. The radiant energy of the Sun provides
the most obvious supply for life today, but bolts of lightning, impacts of asteroids,

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

25

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Earth’s inner heat and the chemical energy of minerals have also been invoked as
life-triggering energy sources.
And, thirdly, life depends on a variety of chemical elements. All living organisms consume atoms of carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen, with a bit of sulfur
and phosphorus and other elements as well. These elements combine in graceful
geometries to form essential biomolecules.
In spite of the intrinsic importance of the topic, it was not until the 1920s that
such scientific speculation took a more formal guise. Most notable among the modern school of origin theorists was the Russian chemist  Alexander Oparin [23]. In
1924, while still in his twenties and under the scrutiny of the atheist, Marxist Soviet
hierarchy, Oparin elaborated on the idea that life arose from a body of water that
gradually became enriched in organic molecules – the so-called “Oparin Ocean”
or the “primordial soup.” Somehow, he posited, these molecules clustered together
and became self-organized into a chemical system that could duplicate itself. In
many other cultures, where religious doctrine colored thinking on origins, these
revolutionary ideas would have been seen as heretical but Oparin’s ideas resonated
with the materialist worldview of the Leninist leadership.
Many of Oparin’s postulates were echoed in 1929 by the independent ideas of
British biochemist and geneticist J. B. S.  Haldane, whose brief, perceptive article
focused on the production of large  carbon-based molecules under the influence
of the Sun’s ultraviolet radiation [24]. Given such a productive chemical environment, Haldane envisioned the first living objects as self-replicating, specialized
molecules .
2.2.1   The Miller–Urey experiment
Oparin and Haldane  offered original and intriguing ideas that were subject to
experimental testing, but Oparin  and his contemporaries didn’t try to replicate
experimentally the prebiotic formation of  biomolecules. Not until the years after
World War II were the landmark experiments of Miller and Urey devised [2, 19,
25]. They mimicked Earth’s early surface by sealing water and simple gases into
a tabletop glass apparatus and subjecting the contents to electric sparks. When
the experiment began the water was pure and clear, but within days the solution
turned yellowish and a black residue had begun to accumulate near the electrodes.
Reactions of water and volcanic gases had produced organic molecules, most notably a suite of amino acids (the building blocks of  proteins), in abundance. The
Miller–Urey experiment transformed the science of life’s chemical origins. For the
first time an experimental protocol duplicated a plausible life-forming process.
Given such an exciting finding, other groups jumped at the chance to duplicate
the amino acid feat. More than a dozen amino acids were synthesized from scratch,

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

26

Robert M. Hazen

along with other key  biomolecules: membrane-forming lipids, energy-rich sugars
and other carbohydrates, and metabolic acids. Enthusiasm grew as other scientists
discovered promising new chemical pathways. In 1960 chemist John Oró demonstrated that a hot, concentrated hydrogen cyanide solution produces adenine, a
crucial biomolecule that plays a role in both genetic material and in  metabolism
[26, 27]. Other chemists conducted similar experiments starting with relatively
concentrated solutions of formaldehyde, a molecule thought to be common in some
prebiotic environments [28]. Their simple experiments produced a rich variety of
sugar molecules, including the critical compound ribose. Gradually, researchers
filled in gaps in the prebiotic inventory of life’s molecules.
As exciting and important as these results may have been, seemingly intractable
problems remain. Within a decade of Miller’s triumph serious doubts began to
arise about the true composition of Earth’s earliest atmosphere. Miller exploited a
highly reactive, chemically reducing atmosphere of methane, ammonia and hydrogen – an atmosphere distinctly lacking in oxygen. But by the 1960s, new geochemical calculations and data from ancient rocks pointed to a much less reducing early
atmosphere composed primarily of nitrogen and carbon dioxide – unreactive gases
that do almost nothing of interest in a Miller apparatus [29].
For decades Miller and his supporters have countered with a pointed argument:
the molecules of life match those of the original Miller experiment with great fidelity. Miller’s advisor, Harold Urey, is said to have often quipped, “If God did not do
it this way, then he missed a good bet” [25] (p. 41). Most geochemists discount the
possibility of more than a trace of atmospheric methane or ammonia at the time of
life’s emergence (except perhaps in local volcanic environments) [30, 31], though
Tian et al. recently proposed that hydrogen may have comprised as much as 30%
of the Hadean atmosphere [32, 33].
Added to this atmospheric concern is the fact that the molecular building blocks
of life created by Miller represent only the first step on the long road to life. Living
cells require that such small molecules be carefully selected and then linked together
into vastly more complex structures – lipid cell membranes, protein enzymes, and
other so-called “macromolecules.” Even under the most optimistic estimates, the
prebiotic ocean was an extremely dilute solution of countless thousands of different kinds of organic molecules, most of which play no known role in life. By what
processes were just the right molecules selected and organized?
The Miller–Urey scenario suffers from another nagging problem. Macromolecules
tend to fragment rather than form when subjected to lightning and the Sun’s ultraviolet light [29]. These so-called “ionizing” forms of energy are useful for making
highly reactive molecular fragments that combine into modest-sized molecules like
amino acids. Combining many amino acids into an orderly chain-like enzyme,
however, is best accomplished in a less destructive energy domain. Emergent

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

27

complexity relies on a flow of energy, to be sure, but not too much energy. Could
life have emerged in the harsh glare of daylight, or was there perhaps a different,
more benign origin environment ?

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.2.2  Deep origins
All living cells require a continuous source of energy. Until recently, scientists
claimed that the metabolic pathways of virtually all life forms rely directly or
indirectly on photosynthesis. This view of life changed in February 1977, with the
discovery of an unexpected deep-ocean ecosystem [34]. These thriving communities, cut off from the Sun, subsist on geothermal energy supplied by Earth’s inner
heat. Microbes serve as primary energy producers in these deep zones; they play
the same ecological role as plants at Earth’s sunlit surface. These one-celled vent
organisms exploit the fact that the cold oxygen-infused ocean water, the hot volcanic water, and the sulfur-rich mineral surfaces over which these mixing fluids
flow are not in chemical equilibrium. The unexpected discovery of this exotic ecosystem quickly led to speculation that a hydrothermal vent might have been the site
of life’s origin [35].
New support for the idea gradually consolidated, as hydrothermal ecosystems
were found to be abundant along ocean ridges of both the Atlantic and Pacific.
Researchers realized that at a time when Earth’s surface was blasted by a continuous meteorite bombardment, deep ocean ecosystems would have provided a much
more benign location than the surface for life’s origin and evolution [36, 37, 38].
New discoveries of abundant primitive microbial life in the deep continental crust
further underscored the viability of deep, hot environments [39, 40, 41]. By the
early 1990s, the deep-origin hypothesis had become widely accepted as a viable, if
unsubstantiated, alternative to the Miller surface scenario.
Following the revolutionary hydrothermal origins proposal, numerous scientists
began the search for life in deep, warm, wet environments. Everywhere they look, it
seems – in deeply buried sediments, in oil wells, even in porous volcanic rocks more
than a mile down – microbes abound. Microbes survive under miles of Antarctic
ice and deep in dry desert sand [42, 43]. These organisms seem to thrive on mineral
surfaces, where water-rock interactions provide the chemical energy for life.
Another incentive exists for looking closely at the possibility of deep origins.
If life is constrained to form in a sun-drenched pond or ocean surface then Earth,
and perhaps ancient Mars or Venus, are the only possible places where life could
have begun in our solar system. If, however, cells can emerge from deeply buried
wet zones, then life may be much more widespread than previously imagined. The
possibility of deep origins raises the stakes in our exploration of other planets and
moons.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

28

Robert M. Hazen

The hydrothermal origins hypothesis received increased attention with the
p­ ublication of a seminal paper in 1988 – “Before enzymes and templates: theory of surface metabolism” by German chemist  Günter Wächtershäuser [44].
Wächtershäuser proposed a theory of organic evolution in which minerals, mostly
iron and nickel sulfides that abound at deep-sea volcanic vents, provide catalytic
surfaces for the synthesis and assembly of life. Wächtershäuser’s model incorporates several assumptions about the nature of the first living entity [44, 45, 46, 47,
48]. First, he rejects the “primordial soup” concept, arguing instead that the prebiotic emergence of biomolecules by Miller–Urey processes was irrelevant because
the primordial soup was much too dilute and contained too many useless molecular
species. Second, the first life form made its own molecules: most other workers
assume that the first living entity scavenged amino acids, lipids, and other useful
molecules from its surroundings – a strategy called “heterotrophy” (from the Greek
for “other nourishment”). Wächtershäuser denies that possibility, since the soup
was so dilute and unreliable. He counters that the first life must have been “autotrophic” (“self nourishment”) – manufacturing its own molecular building blocks
from scratch.
A third assumption is that the first life form relied on the chemical energy of
minerals, not the Sun. Sunlight and lightning are too violent and they are uncharacteristic of the energy sources that most cells use today. Photosynthesis, furthermore, is an immensely complex chemical cascade requiring numerous  proteins
and other specialized molecules. Surface reactions on minerals, by contrast, are
simple and similar to many cellular processes. Wächtershäuser also assumes that
metabolism – a simple cycle of chemical reactions that duplicates itself – comes
first. Many other researchers claim that life began with a self-replicating genetic
molecule like RNA, but even the simplest genetic molecule is vastly more complex
than anything in the soup.
These original ideas are amplified by one additional assumption common to all origin theories – that of biological continuity. Today’s biochemistry, no matter how intricate and dependent on specialized enzymes, has evolved in an unbroken path from
primordial geochemistry. Thus, for example, Wächtershäuser’s  scheme builds on the
observation that many of the molecules that enable living cells to process energy
have, at their very core, a mineral-like cluster of metal and sulfur atoms [49]. Could
this feature be a kind of biomolecular fossil, a remnant of primordial chemistry?
The central chemical postulate of Wächtershäuser’s theory is that iron and nickel
minerals served as templates, catalysts, and energy sources for biosynthesis, all in
one. In Wächtershäuser’s view, simple molecules like carbon monoxide and hydrogen react on mineral surfaces to produce larger molecules. These molecules tend to
have negative charges, and so stick to the positively charged mineral surfaces, where
more reactions build larger and larger molecules. This collection of surface-bound

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

29

molecules begins to feed off each other, eventually forming a chemical cycle that
copies itself.
Recent experiments bolster Wächtershäuser’s hypothesis. The most fundamental biological reaction is the incorporation of carbon atoms (starting with the gas
carbon dioxide) into organic molecules. Many common minerals, including most
minerals of iron, nickel, or copper, promote carbon addition [50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55,
56]. One conclusion seems certain. Mineral-rich hydrothermal systems contributed
to the early Earth’s varied inventory of bio-building blocks.
It now appears that anywhere energy and simple carbon-rich molecules are found
together, a suite of interesting organic molecules is sure to emerge [29]. In spite of the
polarizing advocacy of one favored environment or another [25, 57, 58], experiments
point to the likelihood that there was no single dominant source. By four billion
years ago Earth’s oceans must have become a complex, albeit dilute, soup of life’s
building blocks. Though not alive, this chemical system was poised to undergo a
sequence of increasingly complex stages of molecular organization and evolution.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.3  The emergence of macromolecules
Prebiotic processes produced a bewildering diversity of molecules. Some of those
organic molecules were poised to serve as the essential starting materials of life,
but most of that molecular jumble played no role whatsoever in the dawn of life.
The emergence of concentrated suites of just the right mix remains a central puzzle
in origin-of-life research.
Life’s simplest molecular building blocks – amino acids, sugars, lipids, and
more – emerged inexorably through facile, inevitable chemical reactions in numerous prebiotic environments. A half-century of synthesis research has elaborated
on Miller’s breakthrough experiments. Potential biomolecules from many sources
must have littered the ancient Earth.
What happened next? Individual  biomolecules are not remotely lifelike. Life
requires the assembly of just the right combination of small molecules into much
larger collections  – “macromolecules” with specific functions. Making macromolecules is complicated by the fact that for every potentially useful small molecule in
the prebiotic soup, dozens of other molecular species had no obvious role in biology.
Life is remarkably selective in its building blocks; the vast majority of  carbon-based
molecules synthesized in prebiotic processes have no biological use whatsoever.
2.3.1  Life’s idiosyncrasies
Consider sugar molecules, for example [59]. All living cells rely on two kinds of
5-carbon sugar molecules, ribose and deoxyribose (the “R” and “D” in RNA and
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

30

Robert M. Hazen

DNA, respectively). Several plausible prebiotic synthesis pathways yield a small
amount of these essential sugars, but for every ribose molecule produced many
other 5-carbon sugar species also appear – xylose, arabinose, and lyxose, for
example. Adding to this chemical complexity is a bewildering array of 3-, 4-, 6-,
and 7-carbon sugars, in chain, branch, and ring structures. What’s more, many sugar
molecules, including ribose and deoxyribose, come in mirror-related pairs. These
left- and right-handed varieties possess the same chemical formula and many of
the same physical properties, but they differ in shape like left and right hands. All
known prebiotic synthesis pathways yield equal amounts of left- and right-handed
sugars, but cells employ only the right-handed sugar varieties. Consequently, many
origins researchers have shifted their focus to the processes by which just the right
molecules might have been selected, concentrated, and organized into the essential
structures of life.
The oceans are of little help because they are so vast – a volume greater than
320 million cubic miles. No matter how much organic matter was made, the oceans
formed a hopelessly dilute soup. In such a random, weak solution, it would have
been difficult for just the right combination of molecules to bump into one another
and make anything useful in the chemical path to life. By what process were the
right molecules selected?

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.3.2  Molecular selection
Lipid molecules, the building blocks of cell membranes, accomplish the selection
trick in a striking way. One end of these long, slender molecules is hydrophilic
(water loving), whereas the rest of the molecule is hydrophobic (water hating).
Consequently, when placed in water, life’s lipids spontaneously self-organize into
tiny cell-like spheres. This selection process is rapid and spontaneous [60, 61, 62].
Most molecules don’t self-organize. Consequently, many scientists have focused
on surfaces as an alternative solution. Chemical complexity can arise at surfaces,
where different molecules can congregate and interact. The surface of the ocean
where air meets water is one promising interface, where a primordial oil slick
might have concentrated organic molecules [63]. Evaporating tidal pools where
rock and water meet and cycles of evaporation concentrate stranded chemicals provide another appealing scenario for origin-of-life chemistry [64]. Deep within the
crust and in hydrothermal volcanic zones mineral surfaces may have embraced a
similar role, selecting, concentrating, and organizing molecules on their periodic
crystalline surfaces [38].
Solid rocks provide especially attractive surfaces for concentration and assembly of molecules. Experiments reveal that amino acids concentrate and polymerize
on clay particles to form small, protein-like molecules, while layered minerals also

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

31

have the ability to adsorb and assemble the building blocks of RNA or soak up
small organic molecules in the rather large spaces between layers [65, 66, 67, 68,
69, 70]. Once confined and concentrated, these small molecules tend to undergo
reactions to form larger molecular species that aren’t otherwise likely to emerge
from the soup.
In the most extreme version of this approach, Scottish researcher Graham
Cairns-Smith has speculated that fine-grained crystals of clay, themselves, might
have been the first life on Earth [71, 72, 73, 74]. The crux of the argument rests
on a simple analogy. Cairns-Smith likens the origin of life to the construction of
a stone archway, with its carefully fitted blocks and crucial central keystone that
locks the whole structure in place. But the arch cannot be built by just piling one
stone atop another. He proposes that a simple support structure like a scaffolding
facilitates the construction and then is removed. “I think this must have been the
way our amazingly ‘arched’ biochemistry was built in the first place. The parts that
now lean together surely used to lean on something else – something low tech” [73]
(p. 92). That something, he argues, was a clay mineral.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.3.3  Right and left
One of the most intriguing and confounding examples of prebiotic molecular selection was the incorporation of handedness. Many of the most important  biomolecules, amino acids and sugars included, come in “chiral,” or mirror image, pairs.
These left- and right-handed molecules have virtually the same energies and physical properties, and all known prebiotic synthesis pathways produce chiral molecules in essentially 50:50 mixtures. Thus, no obvious inherent reason exists why
left or right should be preferred, yet living cells display the most exquisite selectivity, choosing right-handed sugars over left, and left-handed amino acids over right
[7, 75, 76, 77].
Some analyses of chiral amino acids in carbonaceous meteorites point to the
possibility that Earth was seeded by amino acids that already possessed a lefthanded bias [78, 79, 80]. According to one scenario, left-handed molecules could
have been concentrated if circularly polarized synchrotron light from a rapidly
rotating neutron star selectively photolyzed right-handed amino acids in the solar
nebula [81, 82, 83]. However, it is also difficult to eliminate entirely the possibility
of a left-handed overprint imposed in the laboratory during the difficult extraction
and analysis of meteorite organics.
Alternatively, many origin-of-life researchers argue that the chirality of life
occurred as a chance event – the result of an asymmetric local physical environment on Earth. Such local chiral environments abounded on the prebiotic Earth, both
as chiral molecules, themselves, and in the form of asymmetric mineral surfaces

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

32

Robert M. Hazen

[84, 85]. Experiments show that left- and right-handed mineral surfaces provide
one possible solution for separating a 50:50 mixture of L and D molecules [77, 86].
Minerals often display chiral crystal faces, which might have provided templates
for the assembly of life’s molecules.
In spite of these insights, many aspects of prebiotic molecular selection and
organization remain uncertain and thus represent topics of intense ongoing research.
Even so, the emergence of macromolecular structures is but one increment in the
stepwise progression from geochemistry to biochemistry. Life requires that macromolecules be incorporated into a self-replicating system.
2.4  The emergence of  self-replicating systems

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Four billion years ago the seeds of life had been firmly planted. The Archean Earth
boasted substantial repositories of serviceable organic molecules. These molecules
must have become locally concentrated, where they assembled into vesicles and
polymers of biological interest. Yet accumulations of organic molecules, no matter
how highly selected and intricately organized, are not alive unless they also possess the ability to reproduce. Devising a laboratory experiment to study chemical
self-replication has proven to be vastly more difficult than the prebiotic synthesis
of biomolecules or the selective concentration and organization of those molecules
into membranes and polymers. In a reproducing chemical system, one small group
of molecules must multiply again and again at the expense of other molecules,
which serve as food.
2.4.1   Metabolism versus genetic mechanisms
A fundamental debate on the origin of life relates to the timing of two essential
biological processes, metabolism versus replication of genetic material [15, 25, 87,
88, 89, 90, 91, 92]. Metabolism is the ability to manufacture biomolecular structures from a source of energy (such as sunlight) and matter scavenged from the
surroundings (usually in the form of small molecules). An organism can’t survive
and grow without an adequate supply of energy and matter. Genetic mechanisms,
by contrast, involve the transfer of biological information from one generation to
the next – a blueprint for life via the mechanisms of  DNA and RNA. An organism
can’t reproduce without a reliable means to pass on this genetic information.
The problem for understanding origins is that metabolism and genetic mechanisms constitute two separate, chemically distinct systems in cells. Nevertheless,
metabolism and genetic mechanisms are inextricably linked in modern life.  DNA
holds genetic instructions to make hundreds of molecules essential to metabolism,
while metabolism provides both the energy and the basic building blocks to make

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

33

 DNA and other genetic materials. Like the dilemma of the chicken and the egg,
it’s difficult to imagine back to a time when metabolism and genetic mechanisms
were not intertwined. Consequently, origin-of-life researchers engage in an intense
ongoing debate about whether these two aspects of life arose simultaneously or
independently and, if the latter, which one came first.
Most experts seem to agree that the simultaneous emergence of metabolism
and genetic mechanisms is unlikely. The chemical processes are just too different, and they rely on completely different sets of molecules. It’s much easier to
imagine life arising one small step at a time, but what is the sequence of emergent steps?
Those who favor genetics first argue on the basis of life’s remarkable complexity; they point to the astonishing intricacy of even the simplest living cell. Without
a genetic mechanism there would be no way to insure the faithful reproduction of
all that complexity. Metabolism without a genetic mechanism may be viewed as
nothing more than a collection of overactive chemicals.
Other scientists are persuaded by the principle that life emerged through stages
of increasing complexity. Metabolic chemistry, at its core, is vastly simpler than
genetic mechanisms because it requires relatively few small molecules that work
in concert to duplicate themselves. In this view the core metabolic cycle – the
citric acid cycle that lies at the heart of every modern cell’s metabolic processes –
survives as a biochemical fossil from life’s beginning. This comparatively simple
chemical cycle is an engine that can bootstrap all of life’s biochemistry, including
the key genetic molecules.
Origin-of-life scientists aren’t shy about voicing their opinions on the metabolism- vs. genetics-first problem, which will probably remain a central controversy
in the field for some time. Meanwhile, as this debate fuels animated discussions,
several groups of creative researchers are attempting to shed light on the issue by
devising self-replicating chemical systems –  metabolism in a test tube.
2.4.2  Self-replicating molecular systems
The simplest imaginable self-replicating system consists of one type of molecule
that makes copies of itself [93]. Under just the right chemical environment, such
an isolated molecule will become two copies, then four, then eight molecules, and
so on in a geometrical expansion. Such an “autocatalytic” molecule must act as
a template that attracts and assembles smaller building blocks from an appropriate chemical broth. Single self-replicating molecules are intrinsically complex in
structure, but organic chemists have managed to devise several varieties of these
curious beasts, including small peptides (made of amino acids) and short strands of
 DNA [94, 95, 96, 97, 98].

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

34

Robert M. Hazen

Nevertheless, these self-replicating molecules don’t meet anyone’s minimum
requirements for life on at least two counts. First, such a system requires a steady
input of smaller highly specialized molecules – synthetic chemicals that must be
supplied by the researchers. Under no plausible natural environment could these idiosyncratic “food” molecules arise independently in nature. Furthermore – and this is a
key point in distinguishing life from non-life – these self-replicating molecules can’t
change and evolve, any more than a Xerox copy can evolve from an original.
More relevant to biological  metabolism are systems of two or more molecules
that form a self-replicating cycle or network. In the simplest system, two molecules
(call them AA and BB) form from smaller feedstock molecules A and B. If AA
catalyzes the formation of BB, and BB in turn catalyzes the formation of AA, then
the system will sustain itself as long as researchers maintain a reliable supply of
food molecules A and B. Theorists elaborate on such a model with networks of
many molecules, each of which promotes the production of another species in the
system [99, 100].
What separates living systems from simple self-replicating collections of molecules?
In part it’s complexity; living systems require numerous interacting molecules. In
addition, a truly living metabolic cycle must incorporate a certain degree of sloppiness. Only through such variations can the system experiment with new, more efficient
reaction pathways and thus evolve.
A dramatic gap exists between plausible theory and actual experiment.
 Metabolism is a special kind of cyclical chemical process with two essential inputs.
Living cells undergo chemical reactions, not unlike burning in which two chemicals (oxygen and fuel) react and release energy. However, the trick in metabolism,
unlike an open fire, is to capture part of that released energy to make new useful
molecules that reinforce the cycle. So metabolism  requires a sequence of chemical
reactions that work in concert .
2.4.3  The iron-sulfur world
The theoretical and experimental pursuit of the  metabolism-first viewpoint is
exemplified by Günter Wächtershäuser’s iron-sulfur world hypothesis [44, 45, 46,
47, 48]. This origin-of-life scenario incorporates a strikingly original autotrophic,
metabolism -first model. According to Wächtershäuser, all of life’s essential  biomolecules are manufactured in place, as needed from the smallest of building blocks:
CO, H2O, NH3, H2S, and so forth. Chemical synthesis is accomplished stepwise, a
few atoms at a time.
The contrast between a heterotrophic versus an autotrophic origin is profound,
and represents a fundamental point of disagreement among origin-of-life researchers. On the one hand, supporters of a heterotrophic origin point out that it’s much

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life

35

easier for an organism to use the diverse molecular products that are available in
the prebiotic soup, rather than make them all from scratch. Why go to the trouble
of synthesizing lots of amino acids if they’re already available in the environment?
In this sense, heterotrophic cells can be simpler than autotrophic cells because
they don’t require all of the biochemical machinery to manufacture amino acids,
carbohydrates, lipids, and so forth. One can thus argue that simpler heterotrophy
should come first.
Autotrophic advocates are equally insistent that true simplicity lies in building
molecules a few atoms at a time with just a few simple chemical reactions. Such
a mechanism, furthermore, possesses a significant philosophical advantage: auto­
trophism is deterministic. Rather than depending on the idiosyncrasies of a local
environment for biomolecular components, autotrophic organisms make them from
scratch the same way every time, on any viable planet or moon, in a predictable
chemical path. Such a philosophy leads to a startling conclusion. For advocates of
autotrophy the prebiotic soup is irrelevant to the origin of life. With autotrophy,
biochemistry is hard wired into the universe. The self-made cell emerges from geochemistry as inevitably as basalt or granite.
As with any metabolic strategy, the iron-sulfur world model requires a source of
energy, a source of molecules, and a self-replicating cycle.  Wächtershäuser’s model
relies on the abundant chemical energy of minerals that find themselves out of
equilibrium with their environment. He begins by suggesting that iron monosulfide
(FeS), a common mineral deposited in abundance at the mouths of many deep-sea
hydrothermal vents, is unstable with respect to the surrounding seawater. As a consequence, iron sulfide combines with the volcanic gas hydrogen sulfide (H2S) to
produce the mineral pyrite (FeS2) plus hydrogen gas (H2) and energy:
FeS + H2S → FeS2 + H2 + energy
Given that energetic boost, hydrogen reacts immediately with carbon dioxide (CO2)
to synthesize organic molecules such as formic acid (HCOOH):
energy + H2 + CO2 → HCOOH
Wächtershäuser envisions cascades of these reactions coupled to build up essential
organic molecules from CO2 and other simple gases.
Recent experiments lend support to the iron-sulfur world hypothesis, which
makes the unambiguous prediction that minerals promote a variety of organic
reactions. Experiments by Wächtershäuser and colleagues in Germany used iron,
nickel, and cobalt sulfides to synthesize acetate, an essential metabolic compound
with two carbon atoms that plays a central role in countless biochemical processes
[52]. They expanded on this success by adding amino acids to their experiments
and making peptides – yet another essential step to life [53, 101]. These and other

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

36

Robert M. Hazen

experiments lead to a firm conclusion: common sulfide minerals have the ability to
promote a variety of interesting organic synthesis reactions.
A centerpiece of the iron-sulfur world hypothesis is Günter Wächtershäuser’s
conviction that life began with a simple, self-replicating cycle of compounds similar to the one that lies at the heart of every cell’s metabolism – the “reductive
citric acid cycle.” But how did the first metabolic cycle operate without enzymes?
Some of the requisite steps, such as combining carbon dioxide and pyruvate to
make oxaloacetate, are energetically unlikely; if one step fails then the whole cycle
fails. One of the clever proposals in Günter Wächtershäuser’s model is that sulfide
minerals promote primordial metabolic reactions. In fact, many modern metabolic
enzymes have at their core a small cluster of iron or nickel and sulfur atoms – clusters
that look like tiny bits of sulfide minerals. Perhaps ancient minerals played the role
of enzymes.
Wächtershäuser’s  iron-sulfur world was manifest as flat life, which predated the
emergence of cells. The first self-replicating entity was a thin layer of chemical reactants on a sulfide mineral surface. The film grew laterally, spreading from mineral
grain to mineral grain as an invisibly thin organic film. Bits of these layers could
break off and reattach to other rocks to make clone-like colonies. Given time, different ­minerals might induce variations in the film, fostering new “species” of flat life.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

2.4.4  The  RNA world
In spite of Wächtershäuser’s elaborate iron-sulfur world scenario and several competing variants of that model [102, 103], most origin experts dismiss a purely metabolic life form in favor of a genetics-first scenario. Even the simplest known cell
must pass volumes of information from one generation to the next, and the only
known way to store and copy that much information is with a genetic molecule like
 DNA or RNA.
California chemist  Leslie Orgel stated that the central dilemma in understanding a genetic origin of life is the identification of a stable, self-replicating genetic
molecule – a polymer that simultaneously carries the information to make copies
of itself and catalyzes that replication [91]. Accordingly, he catalogs four broad
approaches to the problem of jumpstarting such a genetic organism.
One possibility is a self-replicating peptide – a short sequence of amino acids
that emerged first and then “invented”  DNA. That’s an appealing idea because
amino acids are thought to have been widely available in the soup. The problem
is that, while cells have learned how to form ordered chain-like polymers, amino
acids on their own link together in irregular clusters of no obvious biological utility.
Alternatively, the simultaneous evolution of  proteins and  DNA seems even less likely
because it requires the emergence of two improbable molecules. Cairns-Smith’s clay

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:13.

