Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical,
Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press, 2009. ProQu
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

This page intentionally left blank

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

E x plor i ng t h e Or igi n, E x t e n t,
a n d F u t u r e of Li fe

Philosophical, Ethical, and Theological Perspectives
Where did we come from? Are we alone? Where are we going? These are the
questions that define the field of astrobiology. New discoveries about life on Earth,
the increasing numbers of extrasolar planets being identified, and the technologies
being developed to locate and characterize Earth-like planets around other stars,
are continually challenging our views of nature and our connection to the rest of
the universe.
In this book, philosophers, historians, ethicists, and theologians provide the perspectives of their fields on the research and discoveries of astrobiology. A valuable
resource for graduate students and researchers, the book provides an introduction
to astrobiology, and explores subjects such as the implications of current originof-life research, the possible discovery of extraterrestrial microbial life, and the
possibility of altering the environment of Mars.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Consta nc e M. Be rt k a is an Adjunct Professor at the Wesley Theological
Seminary, Washington DC. She was Director of the Program of Dialogue on
Science, Ethics, and Religion of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) from 2002 to 2008.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Cambridge Astrobiology
Series Editors
Bruce Jakosky, Alan Boss, Frances Westall, Daniel Prieur, and Charles Cockell
Books in the series

1. Planet Formation: Theory, Observations, and Experiments
Edited by Hubert Klahr and Wolfgang Brandner
ISBN 978-0-521-86015-4
2.  Fitness of the Cosmos for Life: Biochemistry and Fine-Tuning
Edited by John D. Barrow, Simon Conway Morris,
Stephen J. Freeland and Charles L. Harper, Jr.
ISBN 978-0-521-87102-0
3. Planetary Systems and the Origin of Life
Edited by Ralph Pudritz, Paul Higgs and Jonathan Stone
ISBN 978-0-521-87548-6

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

4.  Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life: Philosophical,
Ethical, and Theological Perspectives
Edited by Constance M. Bertka
ISBN 978-0-521-86363-6

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

E x plor i ng t h e Or igi n, E x t e n t,
a n d F u t u r e of Li fe
Philosophical, Ethical, and Theological Perspectives
Edited by
Consta nce m. Be rt k a

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

American Association for the Advancement of Science

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore,
São Paulo, Delhi, Dubai, Tokyo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521863636
© Cambridge University Press 2009

This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the
provision of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part
may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

First published in print format 2009
ISBN-13

978-0-511-63376-8

eBook (EBL)

ISBN-13

978-0-521-86363-6

Hardback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

To Fei

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Contents

List of contributorspage ix
Acknowledgementsxi
1  Astrobiology in a societal context1
Constance M. Bertka
Part I  Origin of life
2  Emergence and the experimental pursuit of the origin of life21
Robert M. Hazen
3   From Aristotle to Darwin, to Freeman Dyson: changing
definitions of life viewed in a historical context47
James E. Strick
4  Philosophical aspects of the origin-of-life problem:
the emergence of life and the nature of science61
Iris Fry
5  The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective80
Ernan McMullin
6  The alpha and the omega: reflections on the origin and future
of life from the perspective of Christian theology and ethics96
Celia Deane-Drummond
Part II  Extent of life
7  A biologist’s guide to the solar system115
Lynn J. Rothschild
8  The quest for habitable worlds and life beyond the solar system143
Carl B. Pilcher and Jack J. Lissauer
9  A historical perspective on the extent and search for life167
Steven J. Dick
10 The search for extraterrestrial life: epistemology, ethics,
and worldviews186
Mark Lupisella
vii

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

viii

Contents﻿

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

11 The implications of discovering extraterrestrial life:
different searches, ­different issues205
Margaret S. Race
12 God, evolution, and astrobiology220
Cynthia S.W. Crysdale
Part III  Future of life
13 Planetary ecosynthesis on Mars: restoration ecology
and environmental ethics245
Christopher P. McKay
14 The trouble with intrinsic value: an ethical primer
for astrobiology261
Kelly C. Smith
15 God’s preferential option for life: a Christian perspective
on astrobiology281
Richard O. Randolph
16  Comparing stories about the origin, extent, and future
of life: an Asian religious perspective303
Francisca Cho
Index321

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Contributors

Constance M. Bertka
Program of Dialogue on Science, Ethics, and Religion, American Association
for the Advancement of Science; Wesley Theological Seminary, 1108 Churchview
Place, Potomac, MD 20854, USA
Francisca Cho
Department of Theology, Georgetown University, 108 New North, 37 and
O streets NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Cynthia S. W. Crysdale
School of Theology, Sewanee: The University of the South, 735 University Ave.,
Sewanee, TN 37383, USA
Celia Deane-Drummond
Centre for Religion and the Biosciences, Theology and Religious Studies
Department, University of Chester, Parkgate Road, Chester, CH1 4BJ, UK
Steven J. Dick
History Division, National Aeronautics and Space Administration Headquarters,
300 E Street SW, Washington, DC 20546, USA
Iris Fry
The Cohn Institute for the History and Philosophy of Science and Ideas, Tel Aviv
University, P.O. Box 39040, Ramat Aviv, Tel-Aviv, 69978, Israel
Robert M. Hazen
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Geophysical Laboratory, George Mason
University, 5251 Broad Branch Rd NW, Washington, DC 20015, USA

ix

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

x

﻿List of contributors

Jack J. Lissauer
Space Science and Astrobiology Institute, Ames Research Center, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Mark Lupisella
Goddard Space Flight Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
8800 Greenbelt Rd, Greenbelt, MD 20771, USA
Christopher P. McKay
Ames Research Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Mail
Stop 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
Ernan McMullin
Program of History and Philosophy of Science, University of Notre Dame, 100
Malloy Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
Carl B. Pilcher
Astrobiology Institute, Ames Research Center, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
Margaret S. Race
SETI Institute, 515 N. Whisman Road, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Richard O. Randolph
Bioethics Department, Kansas City University of Medicine and Biosciences, 1750
Independence Avenue, Kansas City, Missouri 641006-1453, USA
Lynn J. Rothschild
Ames Research Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Mail
Stop 245-3, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
Kelly C. Smith
Department of Philosophy and Religion, Clemson University, 126D Hardin Hall,
Clemson, SC 29634, USA
James E. Strick
Program in Science, Technology, and Society, Franklin and Marshall College,
P.O. Box 3003, Lancaster, PA 17604, USA

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Acknowledgements

The editor is grateful to all the authors for both their contributions to this volume
and for their participation in the workshop series from which this volume grew.
The editor is also grateful to the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) for its support of the AAAS Program of Dialogue on Science,
Ethics, and Religion, the program through which this work was undertaken with
the encouragement of Al Teich, Audrey Chapman, and James Miller. The editor
is also indebted to Jessica Huls for her assistance in proofing and formatting the
volume. This work was completed with support from the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, NAG5–12966, and a grant from the John Templeton
Foundation, #1860.
The interpretations and conclusions contained in this book are those of the
authors and participants, and reflect their views and not necessarily those of the
AAAS, its Council, Board of Directors, Officers, or the views of the institutions
with which the authors and participants are affiliated.

xi

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

1
Astrobiology in a societal context
Constance M. Bertka

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

1.1  Introduction
In 2003 the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Program
of Dialogue on Science, Ethics, and Religion, invited over twenty scholars from
diverse fields, scientists active in astrobiology, as well as philosophers, historians,
ethicists, and theologians, to explore together the philosophical, ethical, and theological implications of research and discoveries in astrobiology. A major motivation
for this effort was the recognition that the very questions that define astrobiology as
a discipline – Where do we come from? Are we alone? Where are we going? – are
multidisciplinary in nature and have broad appeal to the public-at-large.
It is unavoidable that the science of astrobiology will intersect with, and inevitably challenge, many deeply held beliefs. Exploration possibilities, particularly those
that may include the discovery of extraterrestrial life, will continue to challenge us
to reconsider our views of nature and our connection to the rest of the universe.
Much work has already been done in this area.1 What is unique about our present
circumstance is that past theoretical musings may soon benefit from a renewed
urgency that is awakened both by new discoveries and by technological advances.
Many of the astrobiologists assembled for this workshop have in common another
interest, working proactively to provide more opportunities for non-scientists to
both share in the excitement of this field, and to be informed participants in a public dialogue that considers the opportunities and challenges associated with astrobiology in the near future. With that goal in mind participants were asked that their
work together have a pragmatic focus on the implications of, for example, current
 origin-of-life research, the discovery of  extraterrestrial microbial life in the  solar
 See, for example, S. J. Dick. Plurality of Worlds: The Origins of the Extraterrestrial Life Debate from
Democritus to Kant (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).

1

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life: Philosophical, Ethical, and Theological Perspectives, ed.
Constance M. Bertka. Published by Cambridge University Press. © Cambridge University Press 2009.

1

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

2

Constance M. Bertka

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

system (in contrast to the implications of contact with extraterrestrial intelligent
life), and the possibility of  terraforming Mars.
The astrobiologists who participated in the workshops were charged with laying
the groundwork for each topical discussion by presenting a review of the work of
their field in a manner that would be accessible to scholars outside of their field.
These scientific presentations were followed by presentations that reflected on the
topic from a philosophical, ethical, theological or historical perspective. The perspectives included here are not intended to be exhaustive and the volume is skewed
toward Christian theological responses. Given the religious demographics in this
country (see below) that focus is understandable. Hopefully future work will serve
to broaden the dialogue.
Following the general astrobiology themes, the three workshop topics explored
were the “Origin of Life,” the “Extent of Life,” and the “Future of Life,” all with
the pragmatic focus noted above. The workshops were held over a two-year period
and the majority of participants attended all three. This level of commitment and
interest in the series enabled a progressively rich and ongoing level of dialogue to
take place among the participants. This volume has certainly benefited from that
extended dialogue. The chapters collected here were prepared in light of those
discussions and each was reviewed by at least one workshop participant outside of
the author’s field of expertise. A general summary of the key points of each of the
three parts of the volume is presented below. I also offer my own thoughts on the
unique contributions that astrobiology may bring to the scientific community as it
works at fostering a positive relationship between science and society, particularly
here in the United States.
1.2   Astrobiology and public engagement
As a scientific discipline, astrobiology works from the assumption that the origin
and evolution of life can be accounted for by natural processes, that life could
emerge naturally from the physical materials that make up the terrestrial planets. Whether or not life will be a rare or common occurrence on other terrestrial
planets is yet to be determined. However, with the growing number of extrasolar
planets being discovered, and the development of technologies and missions to specifically search for Earth-like planets, we are progressing ever closer to determining how common or rare  life is in the universe [1]. For the time being the greatest
possibility of discovering past or present life on a planet other than Earth probably
lies with our exploration of Mars. Indeed the focus of Mars exploration has been to
understand the history of water on Mars, as the assumption is that this history will
be intimately linked to the history of life on Mars, if life has ever been there or is
present there now.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

3

The focus on water reflects the decision to  search for life “as we know it.” The
only life we currently know of is the life found on Earth, and for the scientific community the shared common ancestry of all Earth life, and its astounding diversity,
is explained by the  theory of evolution. The work of astrobiology, at its very core, is
fueled by the theory of evolution. However, the dubious position that science holds
with at least half of the American public is perhaps nowhere better illustrated than
by the controversy over the teaching of evolution in this country.
A survey by the  Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life (2005) [2] revealed
that 42% of those surveyed believe that “life has existed in its present form since
the beginning of time” (pp. 7–11). This answer persists nearly 150 years after the
publication of  Charles Darwin’s On the Origin of Species, the landmark work
in which Darwin proposed that living things share common ancestors and have
“descended with modification” from these ancestors through a process of  natural selection [3]. Perhaps even more distressing is the fact that these numbers
have not changed in decades, despite the astounding advancements in science
that have resulted over this same time period, i.e. from space exploration, both
manned and robotic, to sequencing the  human genome and imaging the brain in
action. Knowledge about the physical world gained through science has certainly
increased, but at least half the public is failing when it comes to science literacy,
or at least evolution literacy.
It may appear that the other half is doing a bit better, after all 48% reported that
“life has evolved over time,” but only 26% of those were willing to credit natural
selection as the process responsible [2] (p. 7). At least 18% of this group, who preferred “evolution guided by a supreme being” might welcome the latest challenge to
evolution, the so-called  Intelligent Design theory or ID. The basic premises behind
ID are that some structures or processes associated with life are irreducibly complex, or are evidence of complex specified information, both of which imply that an
intelligent designer is responsible for their production, and that evolution through
 natural selection simply could not have done the job.2 An astounding majority of
those surveyed, 64%, regardless of their own acceptance or rejection of evolution,
feel that both evolution and  creation science or ID should be taught in the public
science classroom because that is the “fair” solution [2] (p. 10) . How will these
facts bear on the usefulness of astrobiology as a tool for encouraging a US public
to share in the excitement of scientific discovery and be informed participants in a
public dialogue concerning next steps? The answer, I believe, depends in large part
on whether or not astrobiology as a discipline has something unique to offer society
when it comes to working on the relationship between science and religion. We
 For a critique of  Intelligent Design as well as other  creationist positions see E. C. Scott. Evolution vs.
Creationism (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2004).

2

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

4

Constance M. Bertka

know precisely where the evolution illiteracy problem is rooted, in the  2005 Pew
survey quoted above when people were asked “to identify the biggest influence
on your thinking about how life developed,” the response chosen most frequently,
42%, was “my religious beliefs” [2] (p. 10). Before considering how astrobiology
might contribute to public engagement issues, we must first turn to a brief review
of the religious landscape in the United States.
A few years ago I accepted an invitation to speak at a local meeting of the
Secular Humanist Association. The group was interested in the general topic of
science and religion, and more specifically, why the American Association for the
Advancement of Science sponsored a program of Dialogue on Science, Ethics,
and Religion. The secular humanists were puzzled by the fact that the scientific
community would even put energy into engaging religious communities. As our
discussion continued, it became clear to me that this group viewed religion as a
relic on its way out and contributed its demise in large part to the success of science in revealing “the truth.” Clearly one of the ideological roots of this group was
the secularization theory. Simply put, this theory holds that as society becomes
increasingly modernized and secular, religious belief, and the influence of religious
institutions, will decline. The theory was a popular one with sociologists of religion
in the 1960s but has now largely been abandoned because it is not supported by
the empirical data [4, 5]. If secularization is not on the rise, how has the religious
landscape, particularly in the USA, but also globally, changed?
A 2005 survey conducted by the  Baylor Institute for Studies of Religion and the
Department of Sociology at Baylor University directly addresses the question in
terms of American piety [6]. The goal of the Baylor Religion Survey is to understand
religion in America. It is a work in progress with additional surveys to be conducted
over the next several years. Initial results speak directly to the question of secularization. The survey’s authors note that previous national studies seemed to indicate
that over the past quarter century there was an increase in the percentage of the
population subscribing to no religion, rising from 8% to over 14%. However, they
note that these previous studies asked people to identify their religious affiliation
based on a list of possible dominations. Given the growth in non-denominational
congregations, as well as congregations that do not emphasize their denominational
identity, the authors suspected that this type of survey may have incorrectly equated
declining denominational ties with declining religion. To test this assumption, in
addition to requesting information on denomination, their survey also asked for the
name and address of the respondent’s place of worship. In this way the researchers
could use the information to locate the place of worship within a denominational
structure, even if the respondent did not recognize this connection.
Using this approach, only 10.8% of the population is determined to be religiously
unaffiliated, versus the 14% of previous surveys, and the previously unaccounted

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

5

for 3% belong to Evangelical denominations. The denominations with the greatest
affiliation include Catholic (21.2%), Evangelical Protestant (33.6%), and Mainline
Protestant (22.1%). Furthermore, of the 10.8% that report being unaffiliated with organized religion, 62.9% report believing in God or some higher power [6] (pp. 7–8, 12).
Religion is not in decline in the US and is experiencing growth similar to that
found in other areas of the world, namely an increase in Evangelical Protestantism,
Charismatic Christianity and  “spirituality” [7].
Within the USA the growth of  Charismatic Christianity can be seen within both
Catholicism as well as within Protestantism. In its earliest phase the Charismatic
movement was referred to as “Pentecostalism” and within the US it originated
in the early twentieth century within a marginalized urban community in Los
Angeles, the Asuza Street Apostalic Faith Mission. “Charismatic” is the more general term used to describe the movement in the later twentieth century. Charismatic
Christianity is characterized by an emphasis on a direct personal experience of
the Spirit of God, often evidenced in worship services by “speaking in tongues”
and “healings.” In addition to the rise of Charismatic Christianity within the US,
another notable, and related trend, is the increase in “spirituality.” Recall that even
of the 10.8% of individuals in the  Baylor Survey who report being unaffiliated
with organized religion, 62.9% report believing in God or some “higher power.”
This finding is revealed even more dramatically in the results of a recent Gallup
Poll, The Spiritual State of the Union: The Role of Spiritual Commitment in the
United States [8]. This survey, consisting of 1004 interviews with US adults conducted in February and March 2006, reports that 40% of the respondents described
themselves as “spiritual but not religious” and this percentage has increased by
10% since a similar survey conducted in 1999. The majority of respondents (49%)
still define themselves as “religious”; however, another 7% describe themselves as
“both” and only 3% as “neither.” When asked more specifically about their beliefs,
82% reported believing in God whereas 13% chose instead belief in a “universal
Spirit.” Note then that of the 40% who chose to describe themselves as “spiritual
but not religious” 26% still identify with theism.
Spirituality is also a factor in the UK, where Steve Bruce has shown that over
a 40-year time span belief in a personal God may have fallen by 8%, but at the
same time belief in “some sort of spirit or vital force which controls life” has
risen by 3% [9]. Paula Heelas uses this work as well as data on religious belief
in Sweden and the United States to argue that the middle ground, between those
who regularly attend church and those who are declared atheists and  agnostics,
is increasing, and this increase is due at least in part to the growth of spirituality [10]. What exactly do we mean by “spirituality”? Heelas defines the term
by contrasting it with religion, which she describes as being centered on a transcendent God whose will is mediated through tradition. Spirituality, in contrast,

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

6

Constance M. Bertka

is not concerned with institutionalized authority, but on a direct experience of the
­divine immanent in life:

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

“Spirituality” has to do with the personal; that which is interior or immanent; that
which is one’s experienced relationship with the scared; and that wisdom or knowledge
which derives from such experiences. At heart, spirituality has come to mean “life”
[10] (p. 358).

It appears that those who define themselves solely as spiritual actually share a common ground with the Charismatic branches of Evangelical Christians, Mainline
Protestants, and Catholics, and it is this common ground that is growing within
the USA. Heelas refers to this common ground as the “HS” factor, which for nontraditionalists, or non-theist spiritualists, implies “the ‘higher self’ within” that is
pursued. For more traditional or theistic spiritualities, “HS” refers to the quest for
the indwelling of the Holy Spirit; for both the focus is on empowering this life in
the here and now. Can astrobiology actually provide a bridge to engaging a religious US public that increasingly, both within and outside of theistic traditions,
describes itself as spiritual? Maybe, if we are willing to build more than one type
of bridge.
How would the goals of astrobiology be viewed by those subscribing to theistic
spirituality , specifically the increasing numbers of Charismatic Christians in the
United States? As this group places more emphasis on interpreting the Bible as an
authoritative historical document than liberal Christian communities, we can predict that the greatest tension might be between what astrobiology learns about the
origin and evolution of life and the Biblical creation story. The same would be true
for conservative Evangelical Protestants. However, it would be incorrect to assume
that either all Charismatic Christians or all Evangelical Protestants will insist on
a literal reading of Genesis; not all are fundamentalists and in fact Charismatic
Christianity in the United States is characterized by the importance it places on a
direct experience of the divine, over a strict adherence to doctrine. For more liberal
Charismatic Christians and Evangelical Protestants the challenging theological
questions will be the same as those for liberal mainline Christians: what was God’s
role in an  origin of life that arose naturally, or, put another way, how does God act
in nature?
Emphasizing the nature of science and the differences between science and religion (see below) is one effort the scientific community can make to help alleviate
this tension, but serious theological work remains to be done as well. Whereas
some of this work is beginning to take place in liberal mainline Christian circles,3
 See, for example, C. Baker. The Evolution Dialogues: Science, Christianity, and the Quest for Understanding,
ed. J. B. Miller (Washington DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science, 2006).

3

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

7

the very nature of Charismatic Christianity, with its focus on individual experience
at the expense of institutionalized doctrine, will be counterproductive in terms of
building a theological framework that incorporates what science has learned about
the world. Much work remains for the Evangelical Protestant community as well.
As for the other questions astrobiology poses, concerning the extent of life
and the future of life, I would argue that these are less threatening, assuming that
our greatest possibility for discovering life in the near future is  microbial life on
Mars, and that they can provide unique opportunities for outreach. The discovery
of a  second genesis of life on Mars most likely would ignite origin and evolution
issues; microbial life related to Earth life would undoubtedly be an exciting discovery, but not one that is particularly challenging to religious beliefs. Future of
life questions, in the broadest interpretation, might appear as an irrelevant question
for Charismatic Christians and Evangelical Protestants in general, as the Biblical
account of history promises a future salvation. On the other hand, interpreting this
question in terms of sustainability issues on Earth can resonate with both liberal
and more conservative Christians, as recently evidenced by the agreement initiated
by prominent members of the Evangelical community to work collaboratively with
the scientific community on global climate change [11].
I suggest above that we should not expect Charismatic Christianity to be encouraging of developing theologies that incorporate scientific findings, not because of
a negative attitude toward science, but because the focus of  spirituality is on individual experience, not the development of doctrine. However, I also suggest that
particular assumptions and possible discoveries of astrobiology will most likely be
met with resistance by members of this group, as well as Evangelical Protestants
in general, and even many liberal Christians, because of the challenges they raise
concerning God’s role in nature and creation. That said, I am still intrigued by the
identification of  “spirituality” with “life,” quoted above, and what this might imply
for a research and exploration program focused on life. Does astrobiology present a
unique opportunity for the scientific community to engage with religious communities, whose members are increasingly defining themselves as spiritual, through a
shared interest in “life”?
There is evidence that the answer for non-theist spiritualists, admittedly a smaller
percentage than the theist spiritualists (13% vs. 26%), is yes. Consider, for example,
the work of Ursula Goodenough [12]. Her main premise, eloquently expressed in
her work, The Sacred Depths of Nature, is that a modern understanding of nature
can give rise to religious emotions, which she defines as “shared cosmology and
shared morality.” Through the story that science tells about the cosmos, with an
emphasis on the origin and interconnectedness of life on this planet, a planetary
ethic may emerge that will provide a guideline for addressing global concerns,
including sustainability issues. For the non-theist spiritualist the story about life

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

8

Constance M. Bertka

that astrobiology is both telling, and striving to discover, might serve to encourage
an interior experience of the divine, that is, “The Sacred Depths of Nature.” Can
the same be true for a theist spiritualist, particularly if their worldview stems from
conservative Christianity? Perhaps the answer depends on how the astrobiology
community engages these individuals.
The scientific community at large, despite unfortunately the opinion of some
of its most vocal members, is taking great effort to remind the public that science
and religion do not need to be in conflict. One recent example is the new publication by the National Academy of Science, Science, Evolution, and Creationism
[13]. This publication emphasizes the “non-overlapping magesteria” or contrast
view of science and religion which was popularized within the scientific community especially by  Stephen J. Gould and his book Rock of Ages: Science and
Religion in the Fullness of Life [14]. Simply put, this model assumes that there
can be no conflict between science and religion since they respond to different
questions; science tells us how, religion tells us why. The  Clergy Letter Project is
another recent effort that promotes the contrast view of science and religion [15].
The letter was initiated on the part of the scientific community (in response to
the controversy over the teaching of evolution in public science classrooms) but
seeks the help of clergy to spread the message. To date over 11,000 clergy members have signed the letter, which includes the plea, “We ask that science remain
science and that religion remain religion, two very different, but complementary
forms of truth.” This is a message the scientific community is comfortable with
and one that fits nicely within a broader program that encourages the scientific
community at large to pay careful attention to how they “frame” their public
statements [16].
Certainly, in regards to engaging a religious public around what science is learning about the world, this model is preferable to one more commonly assumed,
a conflict model, which depicts science and religion as two endeavors inherently
at odds with one another (a model which historians of science and religion have
shown to be oversimplified).4 When we speak as science educators we use the contrast model when we desperately try to help people understand what science is and
can do, and what it isn’t and can’t do. This is an important message and one that
scientists need to keep conveying. That said, I would argue that another approach
has its time and place as well and that the astrobiology community would do well
to embrace that approach – namely one that looks for dialogue and interaction.5 In
order to participate in that approach, we need to be able to listen, and to recognize
 For a review of the interaction between science and Christianity through history see D.C. Lindberg and
R. Numbers (eds.). God and Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter between Christianity and Science
(Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1986).
5
 For a review of models relating Science and Religion see, for example, J.F. Haught. Science and Religion:
From Conflict to Conversation (New York: Paulist Press, 1995).
4

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Astrobiology in a societal context

9

that different religious constituencies will require different engagement models – we
must be building multiple bridges.
Let me illustrate that point with a quote from the Washington Post Magazine in
January 2006. The cover from that edition read, “Darwin vs. God, what the war
between evolution and  Intelligent Design is really about.” I believe the author, who
interviewed students, teachers, and scientists for this story, expresses quite nicely
why we need more than a contrast approach in dealing with science and religion,
“If intelligent design advocates  have generally been blind to the overwhelming
evidence for evolution, scientists have generally been deaf to concerns about evolution’s implication” [17].

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

1.2.1  Who is it that feels we are not listening and
what can we do to reach them?
 The 2005 Pew Survey responses, when broken down according to the broad
Christian religious affiliation categories of “Evangelical,” “Mainline Protestant,”
and “Roman Catholic,” illustrate that all affiliations, even secular, have a percentage of individuals who believe that “life has existed in its present form since the
beginning of time.” This view is, however, predominant among those who classified themselves as Evangelicals (70% of Evangelicals). Mainline Protestants and
Catholics are more accepting of life evolving over time (60%) with nearly equal
amounts attributing the process to natural selection or guidance by a supreme
being  [2]. The contrast view of science and religion is particularly appealing to
Mainline Protestants as is demonstrated, for example, by the positive response
these congregations have given to another outreach effort associated with the
Clergy Letter Project, “Evolution Sunday.”
Evolution Sunday, held near Darwin’s birthday, encourages clergy to devote
one Sunday to emphasizing that science and religion complement one another [15].
Assigning denominations to the same broad religious affiliations used in the
Baylor Survey [6], we find that of the 558 congregations that participated in
Evolution Sunday in 2007 the majority (78%) represented Mainline Protestant
churches; the next largest category (18.1%) consisted predominantly of Unitarian
Universalist congregations (a liberal religion with Judeo-Christian roots).
Evangelical Protestant congregations accounted for less than 2% of the participating congregations.
The success story of the Clergy Letter Project, Evolution Sunday, and the contrast approach in general, is that mainline Christian denominations are being vocal
about supporting the teaching of evolution. This is good news. A remaining and
serious challenge is to engage evangelical communities on this issue and a contrast approach to science and religion is unlikely to accomplish this end. We need
to honestly ask ourselves, is our goal limited to keeping  creationism out of the

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

10

Constance M. Bertka

science classroom, perhaps by majority rule, or are we interested in working long
term towards a widespread acceptance of evolution? A widespread acceptance of
evolution in the United States will require that the scientific community go beyond
a simple contrast approach and be willing to encourage, and participate in, a program of in-depth and long-term engagement with theologians and religious community leaders.
We are correct in helping people understand that science can’t by itself answer
questions about meaning. But in doing only this, without a broader conversation,
are we also suggesting that what science learns about the world, what the world is,
has absolutely no relevance for our thoughts about what the world means? Are we
condoning a focus on life as an interior experience, disconnected from the larger
context? If astrobiology has done anything for the scientific community it has at
minimum encouraged us to expand our vision beyond that of our immediate discipline, to see the larger context and to struggle to find a way to participate in a multidisciplinary scientific dialogue. This is the very contribution that I suggest makes
astrobiology the ideal discipline for expanding the dialogue into an even broader
context with a specific invitation to theologians and religious leaders to participate.
We may even be able to build on the interest of theistic spiritualists in “life” so that
through astrobiology in particular we may engage their interest in what science has
learned about the world.
Securing a religious public’s support for space science research and exploration,
so that it merits a high enough priority to claim resources, though vital, is only the
beginning. It is in the sharing of what we learn from the exploration that the process comes full circle, and then, only when the discoveries are owned by both the
religious and the spiritual, both the liberal and conservative. Hopefully this volume
provides one example of the broadening of context that can occur for all involved
when members of the astrobiology community invite theologians, ethicists, histor­
ians and philosophers to learn about astrobiology, to reflect on its work from the
perspective of their own discipline, and to share their findings with the scientific
community and the public at large. Summarized below are the key points of the
contributors to this volume, organized according to astrobiology themes .
1.3  Origin of life
Where did we come from? Astrobiology includes the study of the origin and evolution of life on Earth and draws on the results of these studies to explore the possibility of life arising and thriving on other planetary bodies. The authors of the
first part of this volume, an origins researcher, a historian, a philosopher, and two
theologians, specifically address the origins question from the perspective of their
discipline. They provide an introduction to the science of life’s origin; describe

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Astrobiology in a societal context

11

attitudes towards the  definition of life as a function of historical context; use the
study of life’s origin as an example to illustrate the nature of science; offer an early
Christian perspective on life’s origin which can reflect favorably on current scientific understanding; and argue for the unique perspective Theology can bring to
astrobiology’s pursuits around the questions of origin and future of life.
The focus of origins research is elucidating how the first living cell arose from
non-living matter, a formidable task. Both  Hazen and  Fry emphasize that although
the specific, historical pathway that gave rise to life on Earth may never be known,
the scientific community harbors great optimism for discovering the general chemical pathways that led to this outcome. Hazen suggests that the study of emergence,
“the natural process by which complexity arises” can provide a unifying theme for
origins research and that the emergent systems approach is particularly amenable
to experimentation.
Fry prefers an “arch and scaffolding model” as a unifying theme for origins
research. She argues that this model excels at providing an answer to the question
of apparent design, a question posed by the fact that both  metabolism and replication of genetic material are required for cell functioning. If these two distinct
systems are dependent on one another, how then can evolution account for their
appearance? Fry suggests that the various solutions offered to answer this dilemma
all have in common the analogy of a supporting scaffold used to build a stone arch;
the scaffold is present during construction but not obvious in the final product.
Both Hazen  and Fry note that  origin-of-life research is a relatively recent
endeavor propelled forward by the Miller–Urey experiments 50 years ago . Fry also
argues that this is the time during which the theory of evolution “came into maturity” opening the door to the assumption that life formed in the past through a natural process from inorganic matter. Origin-of-life research, she argues, should be
granted the same scientific status as  evolution research and not viewed as a weak
point in the scientific explanation of the history of life.
 Strick’s review of changes in the definition of life from a historical perspective
illustrates how the origin-of-life question was handled gingerly both by Darwin
and his supporters.  Darwin was well aware that the  theory of evolution would be
challenging for a religious public and in the first edition of Origins took great care
to leave the possibility of divine intervention open in regards to the appearance of
the first life form . Strick’s review of the reactions of Darwin’s supporters, both religious and non-religious to the definition of life and its first origins, and changing
perspectives on the definition of life by scientists up until the present, demonstrates
the important role cultural experience plays in the scientific endeavor.
Cultural experience also plays an important role in Theology.  McMullin’s
contribution to this volume traces the influence of the prevailing philosophies of
 Augustine’s time on his views on creation. Augustine, a prominent theologian

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:02.

