Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective

87

The Greek theologians had already noted the significant role played by earth in
all the makings described in Genesis 2. In contrast to the summoning into existence by an act of the Divine will described in the first chapter, the “makings”
mentioned in the second chapter (excepting that of woman) are said to be from
the earth, an earth that had just been watered and made fruitful. Augustine draws
attention to the essential role attributed here to earth and water in the first appearance of each natural kind at its appropriate moment. His proposal is that potencies,
causal possibilities, must have been implanted in the matter of the first creation,
potencies that would in due time lead to the later appearance of each kind, here
more exactly described as a fashioning from materials already at hand, unlike the
coming-to-be from nothing prior, characteristic of the first appearance of a source
of those materials.
In the Old Latin translation of the text that Augustine used, the second account
of creation begins: “This is the book of the creation of heaven and earth. When day
was made, God made heaven and earth and every green thing of the field before it
appeared above the earth.” 4 Augustine gives an elaborate construal of this passage,
noting different possible ways to read the text. The phrase that particularly caught
his attention was the reference to plants that existed within the earth before making
their appearance above ground. It provided him with a ready analogy on which he
could draw to support his more general thesis about the role of potential existence
within the earth prior to appearance in mature form when conditions were right.
How literally were analogies of this kind to be taken here? The seedlike principles are clearly not seeds in any ordinary sense. Augustine readily admits that
they are difficult for us to imagine since they are of their nature hidden from view.
Yet, as he reminds the reader, this is no different from the principle or cause that
brings about our own growing old. Such principles lie within us; though they are
inaccessible to our senses, “by another kind of knowledge we conclude that there
is in nature some hidden force by which latent forms are brought into view” [6]
(par. 27). Analogies can help: “There is, indeed, in seeds some likeness to what I
am describing because of the future developments stored up in them. Indeed, it is
the seedlike principle that is the more basic of the two, since it comes before the
familiar seeds we know” [6] (par. 11). He goes further:
In the seed, then, there was invisibly present all that would develop in time into a tree. And
in the same way we must picture the world, when God made all things together, as having
had all things that were made in it and with it when day was made. This includes not only
heaven with sun, moon and stars … but also the beings which earth produced in potency
and in their causes before they came forth in the course of time [5] (par. 45).
 Later translators have agreed in substituting for “before it appeared” something like “there was as yet no
vegetation upon the earth.”

4

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

88

Ernan McMullin

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The force of this analogy lies in the notion of potentiality: the original creation
contained within it the potentialities for all the living kinds that would later
appear. The seedlike principles were conceptually distinct from one another, but
Augustine did not think of them as distinct physical bodies that lay somehow
embedded, after the fashion of ordinary seeds, within the primal matter. They
were real, they were physical, but they did not have to occupy a specific location,
as a seed would [7].5 To assert that the seedlike principle for a particular natural
kind lay within the earth meant no more (and no less) than that the earth had conferred upon it what it would take for that natural kind to develop eventually within
it in a natural way: “All things were created by God in the beginning in a kind of
blending of the elements, but they could not develop and appear until the circumstances were favorable” [8].
It sounds as though the seedlike principle was enough of itself, once the environment was right, to produce the new kind in a natural way, that is, by virtue of
the “causal connections,” as Augustine calls them, that the Creator implanted from
the beginning within matter generally. Is this, then, what is meant by the “making”
attributed to the Creator in the second story of creation? Granted that no new act of
creation, of radical bringing-to-be, is needed, is no further, lesser, supplementation
of the causal capacities of matter on the part of the Creator required?
At times, Augustine hesitates to say so, in regard to some comings-to-be, at least.
To assert this would raise a troublesome issue: does the new kind of animal come to
be as infant or as adult? If infant, how does it survive? If as adult, the ordinary laws
of nature would not suffice to bring it about, and a further miraculous intervention
on God’s part would be needed. Augustine leaves the matter open:
In either case, whichever way God made [Adam’s body] He did what was in accordance
with His almighty power and wisdom. God has established in the temporal order fixed
laws governing the production of kinds of beings and qualities of beings and bringing them
forth from a hidden state in full view, but His will is supreme overall. By His power He
has given numbers to his creation, but He has not bound His power by these numbers [6]
(par. 13; p. 194).

The “numbers” referred to here are the laws of nature. Augustine often drew upon a
sentence from Wisdom (11:21): “Thou hast ordered all things according to measure,
number, and weight,” to describe the kind of order that the Creator imparted to the
activity of the physical world. In these chapters of the De Genesi he goes out of his
way, as he frequently does elsewhere in his theological works, to convey that God
is not bound by this order. He can depart from it by way of miracle, and this too is
 McKeough cites numerous Catholic writers, beginning with Edouard Thamiry (De rationibus seminalibus,
Paris, 1905) who debated the meaning and significance of the doctrine of seminal principles in the early part
of the twentieth century.

5

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective

89

“natural” in the broader sense that openness to miracle is a basic trait of the natures
that the Creator brought to be.6 But Augustine makes it clear that miracle would
not ordinarily be involved for the seedlike principle to give rise to the appropriate
natural kind when “the conditions are right.” What the Creator’s “making” would
amount to in these cases would be the regular conservation in being afforded to all
creatures and their actions, ordered as they are by the “numbers” by which they have
been constituted. Still, it should be kept in mind that Augustine does allow that this
may not be sufficient when something apparently impossible is in question, like the
production directly from the earth of the adult animal body by means of the multiple
causalities conferred on matter in the beginning [2] (pp. 13–15).
It is possible now to see how the postulation of seedlike principles that enables one to speak without contradiction of an initial simultaneous “creation of all
things” goes some way towards resolving the troublesome tension between the
Genesis chapters. Chapter 1 can be taken to describe the instantaneous bringing
into existence of the primal matter, containing within it the causal resources for
all the kinds that would later appear and therefore in a real sense already present
within it. Chapter 2 follows the subsequent history of the working out in time
of these causal possibilities and the actual first appearances “from the earth” of
plants, wild beasts, and birds, a “making” that may or may not require a supplementation of the natural potentialities of matter on the Creator’s part. There
are loose ends, of course, as Augustine was the first to admit, notably in regard
to the appearance of the animal, and especially the human, body. If the seminal
principles were not sufficient of themselves to bring that appearance about, so that
some sort of supplementary action on God’s part was required, a “making” in a
stronger sense then, could one properly hold that the matter of the initial creation
already in some sense contained “all things”? Augustine tries to meet this objection by allowing a second extended sense of “seedlike principle,” but it is at best a
strained response. In what follows, the term will be used in  Augustine’s primary
sense to designate a feature of the regular causal order of the physical world, capable of bringing about the appearance of a new physical kind when the conditions
are propitious.
5.5  Genesis and On the Origin of Species
To trace the fortunes of Augustine’s account of cosmic origins through the centuries
that followed would lead far afield. A few brief remarks will have to suffice. Medieval
theologians, with whom Augustine carried more authority than any source other
 The term, “natural,” is used in this essay, however, in the more usual sense where God’s “special” action is
not involved.

6

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

90

Ernan McMullin

than the Bible, were aware of his foray in  cosmogony. But for those who sought a
story of origins that all could understand, Genesis 1, read literally, carried undeniable attraction. Hexaemeral (“Six Day”) literature flourished, embellishing the biblical story in imaginative ways and making it the introduction to a general account
of the natural world for the Christians of that time.
For those among them who took  Aristotle as their guide, there were serious reasons to doubt the Augustinian version of origins.  Aquinas, who revered Augustine,
did his best to present the two alternatives, literal-biblical and Augustinian, as fairly
as possible [2] (pp. 16–21).7 But for an Aristotelian, the Augustinian proposal would
have held little attraction. The notion of living kinds making their first appearance
in a quasi-natural way, impelled by causal powers present since the first creation,
ran contrary to the fundamental principles of Aristotle’s physics. No such powers
had ever been discovered actually at work. Easier for a Christian Aristotelian to
call on a six-day succession of miracles in the first place: the very notion of a cosmic beginning itself had to lie outside the bounds of nature as Aristotle understood
the natural world.
The advent centuries later of the Protestant Reformation led to a heightened
emphasis on literal interpretation of the Bible among Protestants and Catholics
alike. Genesis was a favored source in cosmology. Tensions between it and
Aristotle’s physics were much debated. An interpretation that departed as far from
the literal as Augustine’s reading of Genesis 1 was not likely to win much support.
Jumping far ahead once again, this was to change, to some modest extent at least, in
the last decades of the nineteenth century. After centuries in the shade, Augustine’s
vision of  cosmogony would once more gain a modest degree of notice.
The reason, of course, was simple. In the wake of Darwin’s On the Origin of
Species, Augustine’s account offered an authentic Christian alternative to the literalist reading of Genesis that  Darwin’s work had so dramatically, and so effectively, called into question. It demonstrated that the greatest theologian of the
early Christian church did not regard the literalist reading of the six-day story of
creation as plausible, let alone obligatory. Furthermore, and even more important,
the alternative reading he suggested opened the way to a gradualist account of
cosmic ­origins. Calling on Augustine for support seems to have been particularly
­appealing to a small number of Catholic writers8 who were sympathetic to evolutionary ideas as well as to patristic precedent and who were wrestling with the
 The relevant passages of the Summa Theologica are to be found in Part I, questions 70–74.
 It is quite striking that the Augustinian notion of seedlike reasons was rarely, if ever, cited among the far more
numerous Protestant writers who, in this early period, defended a broadly Darwinian, gradualist, account of
the origin of living things. See, for example, J.H. Roberts. Darwinism and the Divine in America: Protestant
Intellectuals and Organic Evolution 1859–1900 (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2001);
D.N. Livingstone. Darwin’s Forgotten Defenders: The Encounter between Evangelical Theology and
Evolutionary Thought (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1987).

7
8

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective

91

prevailing literalism of the approach to Genesis among Catholic scholars. These
authors clearly expected the appeal to the Fathers of the Church to carry particular
weight.
As early as 1871, a distinguished English biologist, St. George Mivart, a defender
of evolution (though departing from Darwin’s account in significant ways), pointed
to the relevance of Augustine’s treatment of the origin of  natural kinds as opening the way, theologically speaking, for an evolutionary approach [9]. In the US,
John Zahm at the University of Notre Dame, a leading figure in the contemporary debates about the relations of science and religion, likewise underlined the
Augustinian precedent as a theological warrant for those who would see evolution
as God’s way of bringing the  natural kinds to be [10]. In 1909, a noted geologist,
Henri de Dorlodot, representing the Catholic University of Louvain, offered a tribute at a celebration in Cambridge of the fiftieth anniversary of the publication of
On the Origin of Species, and went on to develop over some years a theological
defense of  Darwin that eventually appeared in book form in 1921. He analyzed a
series of patristic texts in some detail, focusing on  Gregory of Nyssa and Augustine
and concluding that “the authority of the Fathers would lead us to accept the theory
of absolute natural evolution – a theory which was formally professed, as we have
shown, by St. Gregory of Nyssa and St. Augustine” [11]. And again: [St. Augustine
held] “that the theory of the absolute natural evolution of living beings is a necessary deduction from the infallible teaching of Holy Writ” [11] (pp. 87, 149). De
Dorlodot’s English translator, Ernest Messenger, went on later to publish a work of
his own carrying a similar, though more cautiously worded, message, which had a
very wide circulation in Britain and the USA [12].
The initiatives on the part of these writers, arguing for the Augustinian credentials of the notion of organic and perhaps pre-organic evolution, met with opposition, occasionally strenuous opposition on the part of Church authorities, notably
in Zahm’s case. Part of the problem was the ambiguity in what was being claimed.
When these writers claimed  Augustine’s sanction for “natural evolution,” did this
mean  Darwinian evolution? Specifically, did it extend to “transformism,” as the
view that species evolved by the transformation of earlier species was being called?
Surely, the critics argued, Augustine could not have had in mind this specifically
Darwinian innovation, involving natural selection as its agent. Augustine would
have assumed that each seedlike principle was linked one-to-one with a specific
natural kind. It would hardly have occurred to him that one kind might over the
course of time be transformed into another. With his background in  Greek philosophy, he would assuredly never have countenanced this and could call on both Plato
and Aristotle  for assurance in that regard. So it would certainly not be correct to
suggest that Augustine’s theology of seedlike principles supports Darwin’s specific
version of how organic evolution might come about.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

92

Ernan McMullin

Though this is correct, a weaker claim is still significant. Part of the problem here
is the ambiguity of the term “evolution.” Since Darwin’s time, the term has meant
only one thing for most people: evolution is what  Darwin proposed and argued for
in On the Origin of Species. When the writers mentioned above recalled Augustine’s
De Genesi as a theological precedent for “natural evolution,” what their readers
tended to take from this, even when Darwin was not specifically mentioned, was that
Augustine had already proposed a quasi-Darwinian account of the origins of living
things. This Augustine did not do, as we have seen. But what the authors meant (or
at least should have meant!) was something much broader but still significant: that
Augustine defended a gradualist account of origins, where causal resources were
already implanted in the original creation that would be sufficient, under favorable
environmental circumstances, to allow all of the profusion of plant and animal life
to make its appearance later. How this was to be achieved, how the seedlike principles would operate, Augustine quite frankly admitted that he did not know. Darwin 
has filled in that picture in ways that Augustine would have marveled at. 
But would he have welcomed it? Some might argue that his seed analogy is much
too teleological in implication to be even compatible with the Darwinian picture.
The seed, after all, must take a predetermined path as it develops into the mature
organism. There is a preset goal that will be reached if the conditions are favorable.
The zigzag path followed by natural selection could hardly be more different.
Here, once again, a reminder is needed that the seed analogy is not supposed to
be taken literally, as Augustine himself so strongly emphasized. It is no more than
a convenient comparison that works in some respects but not in others. As with
any analogy, one must ask what it was intended to bring out. The point Augustine
wanted to convey was clearly retrospective, not prospective, in intention. That is,
his point was that the causal resources, whatever they might have been, were there
right from the beginning to explain the later appearance of the different  natural
kinds. That was sufficient to enable him to hold that those kinds had themselves,
in a limited but real sense, been present (i.e. in potency) from the first moment of
cosmic beginning.
This is something that Darwinians could agree with and, indeed, in some contexts, would themselves want to emphasize. Taking the analogy in a prospective
sense was not what Augustine had in mind, however, as though he maintained that
one could predict from a knowledge of the seedlike principles what the course of
later development would be:
The principle which makes this development possible is hidden to the eyes but not to
the mind. But whether such a development must necessarily come about is completely
unknown to us. We know that the principle that makes it possible is in the very nature of
[the] body. But there is no clear evidence in that body that there is a principle by which it
must necessarily take place [6] (par. 16).

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective

93

Concluding, then, there was a firm precedent in the early Christian tradition for
the view that the six-day Genesis account of cosmic origins was not to be taken
literally and that the most satisfactory reading of it – satisfactory from both the
theological and the philosophical standpoints – was to suppose that the Creator
implanted in the original cosmic material the wherewithal for the diversity of living
things that over the ages would later make its appearance.9 So that sanctioning evolution, broadly understood as gradual development, in this way cannot be ­dismissed
as no more than a defense measure introduced post-Darwin to fend off criticism
inspired by On the Origin of Species. It has an honorable ancient lineage.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.6  The origin of terrestrial life
It is not difficult to see what the implication of the Augustinian vision is for the
multitude of researchers engaged in solving the puzzle of how the first cells might
have come to be. It would be an emphatic: keep at it! The seedlike principles were
almost surely there from the very beginning, even though it may not be within our
reach to establish the specific causal sequence to which they gave rise in the earth
and water of long, long ago. The philosophical/scientific grounds for this confidence would not be the same today as they were for Augustine. But the theological
grounds would be in important respects the same.
What has, however, encouraged some to take this occasion to promote the special-creation alternative once again, what has, in consequence made the proper
theological response to the origin-of-life issue once more a matter of debate, has
been the problem of envisioning in scientific terms what the path might conceivably have been from the play of non-living molecules to the tight organization of
even the simplest cell. This is what led Mivart and de Dorlodot, champions otherwise of Augustine’s seedlike principles, to deny in the case of the former, and to
doubt in the case of the latter, that such a path could exist. For a time after Miller’s
discovery in 1952 of amino-acids in the residue of a simple mixing of inorganic
molecules supposedly mimicking the constitution of the primitive atmosphere of
Earth, it seemed to many that a giant step had been made along that path. But that
enthusiasm gradually evaporated as the biochemical complexity of even the most
basic cell became more and more apparent. Great strides have been made in recent
years, but significant obstacles remain. …
An alternative, of course, would be to suppose that the Creator supplemented the
normal operations of nature in this case to initiate a new stage in cosmic development. For those, however, who do not believe in the existence of a Creator, there
 Howard van Till develops what he calls the “functional integrity” of the creation along these same lines
in Basil, Augustine, and the doctrine of the Creation’s functional integrity. Science and Christian Belief, 8
(1996), 21–38.

9

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

94

Ernan McMullin

obviously has to have been a causal path directly from the non-living to the living,
no matter how far from being understood in terms of currently known causal possibilities this may be. For them there is no other option. Less combatively, others
would insist, on methodological grounds, that the naturalist option should continue
to be energetically pursued. And here is where debate can arise, as indeed it has:
one side maintaining that the difficulty in conceiving a “natural” path in this case
implies the need for a designer’s intervention and thus may even become an independent argument for the existence of such a designer, the other side vigorously
questioning the force of this appeal to a designer, on either metaphysical or methodological grounds.
In the context of this contemporary debate, Augustine’s doctrine of seedlike
principles takes on a real relevance. It might have seemed in advance somewhat
strained to hark back to an intellectual context so remote from ours to illuminate
a theological option that believers in a Creator, be they Christian, Jewish, Moslem,
or other, might want to call on when faced with this dispute about the origin of life.
Despite the evident difference of context, however, the theological principles that
underlay Augustine’s doctrine can be disentangled from what is no longer relevant
to them and put to good use once again today.
These principles might fairly be summarized as follows. From the Augustinian
perspective, it seems unlikely that there would be no possible way in which a transcendent Creator could impart to the original created world the capacities that
would have made possible the natural transition from non-life to life on Earth.
From this it would plausibly follow, first, that the Creator would have made those
seedlike principles part of the original cosmic endowment. And second, it would
also follow that it is appropriate for the scientist to proceed on the expectation that
life would have come to be in a manner, in principle at least, accessible to human
science. To your average scientist these might seem pretty minimal conclusions!
But in the light of recent controversy about the appropriate Christian approach to
the issue of the origin of the first life on Earth, it is not a small matter if one can
show how they fit quite comfortably into the first great  theology of creation. 
References
[1]  M. Behe. Darwin’s Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution (New York:
Free Press, 1996), chapter 4.
[2]  E. McMullin. Introduction: evolution and creation. In Evolution and Creation, ed. E.
McMullin (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1985), pp. 1–56.
[3] Augustine. The Literal Meaning of Genesis, 2 vols., trans. J. H. Taylor (New York:
Newman, 1982), Book IV.
[4] Gregory of Nyssa. Apologetic Treatise on the Hexaemeron. In Patrologia Graeca, ed.
J. P. Migne, 44, col. 72, trans. E. C. Messenger in his Evolution and Theology (New
York: Macmillan, 1932), p. 24; translation slightly modified.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

The origin of terrestrial life: a Christian perspective

95

  [5] Augustine. The Literal Meaning of Genesis, 2 vols., trans. J. H. Taylor (New York:
Newman, 1982), Book V.
  [6] Augustine. The Literal Meaning of Genesis, 2 vols., trans. J. H. Taylor (New York:
Newman, 1982), Book VI.
  [7]  M. J. McKeough. The Meaning of Rationes Seminales in St. Augustine (Washington,
DC: Catholic University of America, 1926), pp. 33–35.
  [8] Augustine. De Trinitate, Book III, par. 9.
  [9]  St. George Mivart. The Genesis of Species (New York: Appleton, 1871).
[10]  J. Zahm. Evolution and Dogma (Chicago, IL: McBride, 1896).
[11] H. de Dorlodot, Le Darwinisme au point de vue de l’orthodoxie catholique (Brussels:
Lovanium, 1921), trans. E. C. Messenger as Darwinism and Catholic Thought, vol. 1,
The Origin of Species (New York: Benziger, 1922).
[12]  E. C. Messenger. Evolution and Theology: The Problem of Man’s Origins (New York:
Macmillan, 1932).

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Note added in proof: Besides his discussion in the Summa Theologica of Augustine’s
i­ nterpretation of Genesis on cosmic creation, Aquinas also discusses this in an earlier
work, his Commentary on the Sentences (II, 12, 1, 2), where he describes this ­interpretation
as “the more reasonable one.” See Norman Kretzmann. The Metaphysics of Theism:
Natural Theology in the Summa Contra Gentiles (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997)
pp. 190–193.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

6
The alpha and the omega: reflections on the
 origin and future of life from the perspective
of Christian theology and ethics
Celia Deane-Drummond

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

 Astrobiology, encompassing the search for life on other planets,  laboratory ­studies
of the origin of early life forms from precursor materials, and prospects for the
discovery of  microbial life on other planets reflects outcomes at the cutting edge of
science and  technology. Yet the issues that such investigations raise are profound,
for not only do they bear on our own sense of self in relation to the cosmos, but
they also raise deep philosophical and religious issues concerned with purpose,
meaning, and human identity. Given these profound challenges, the ethical and
moral frameworks within which such developments take place need to be carefully
considered, for outcomes of such deliberations have public and social importance
alongside a potential scientific gain. The intention of this chapter is to:
1.  analyze those philosophical and theological themes that arise in the context of the origin
of life, focusing particularly on the intersection of physical and evolutionary parameters
in the interplay of  chance and necessity, alongside debates around purpose and design;
2.  consider some of the ethical issues associated with both the origin and future of life
from a  Christian ethical perspective, including responsibility for future generations;
3.  argue for the recovery of a sense of wisdom, from both a theological perspective and
through  phronesis or  practical wisdom.

It would be impossible to do justice to the full range of possible positions that a
theologian might take in relation to theological and ethical issues raised by astrobiology. For this study, I have drawn on the work of contemporary Protestant writers, such as Arthur Peacocke, as he has been very influential in the science and
religion field. I am also convinced, however, that the medieval theologian Thomas
Aquinas, especially in his understanding of  prudence, has something useful to contribute to contemporary ethical debates. Arguments for using this method, rather
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life: Philosophical, Ethical, and Theological Perspectives, ed.
Constance M. Bertka. Published by Cambridge University Press. © Cambridge University Press 2009.

96

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

The alpha and the omega

97

than, for example, engagement with Biblical or other traditional resources, such as
Roman Catholic social teaching, are outside the scope of this chapter.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

6.1  What is life?
One of the greatest challenges facing those scientists who are brave enough to enter
the difficult waters of trying to recreate the early conditions of the  solar system
before life appeared on Earth is how to move from physical molecular processes to
what might be broadly defined as “life.” The definition of life will clearly influence
those claims for or against having created “life” in a laboratory. The  definition of
life is also influenced by prior commitments to particular philosophies. A materialist, for example, will have a very different definition compared with someone who
believes that life is energized by spiritual forces. Those who adhere to mechanistic
and reductionistic philosophies believe that complex activities can be explained by
reference to molecules and their mutual interactions. In contrast, there are those
who argue that the materialist explanation is insufficient to explain emergent properties, that instead such properties become unique to the level of complexity under
study. More holistic interpretations resist mechanistic definitions in favor of more
complex functions as a requirement for life, and may even be associated with the
ancient concept of vitalism, or a “life force,” energizing life into being. While
there are some religious believers who adhere to the concept of a “life force,” this
is rejected by biologists and physicists alike, as well as those theologians who are
prepared to take the results of science seriously.
Some astrobiologists have suggested that we need to look for broad features of
life, in order to look for other non-Earth “biosignatures,” rather than associate life’s
definition with that life found on Earth [1] (p. 9). In this Popa goes further than most
astrobiologists, who seek Earth-biosignatures understood as those external conditions that make life as we know it possible on Earth. I suggest that if very different
forms of “life” were to be discovered on other planets then there would be a need
to use very different terminology that reflects its different origin and function. John
Maynard Smith and  Eörs Szathmáry are, I think, correct to state that “if we are
to distinguish between a living being and an artefact, it can only be by knowing
its history” [2]. Life requires information flow, hence it needs to store and use that
information, so that in the context of laboratory experiments to create life, it can
be distinguished from non-life by viewing that information as superimposed on
certain states of matter or energy [3].
6.2   Chance and necessity in the origin of life
Although the chance of fully functional life emerging spontaneously on Earth
is infinitely small, most scientists argue that life began through small steps that
Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

98

Celia Deane-Drummond

were gradually built up over a very long time. Debates exist as to which process originated first. Was it primitive metabolic pathways? Perhaps building blocks
subsequently formed more complex molecules that enabled a membrane to encase
particular reaction centers, eventually leading to the formation of ribonucleic acid
[4]. An alternative theory is that ribozymes were the most important, in which case
ribonucleic acid also acted as enzymes for catalytic reactions [5]. The difficulty in
this case is how to arrive at complex molecules from inorganic sources. The early
experiments conducted by  Stanley Miller at the University of Chicago in the 1950s
showed how it was possible to make a wide range of amino acids as well as hydrogen cyanide when an electric spark was added to a reducing atmospheric mix of
methane, ammonia, hydrogen, and water vapor [6]. Such research confirmed previous speculations by the Russian chemist  Aleksandr Ivanovich Oparin (1894–1980)
and the British geneticist  John Haldane (1892–1964). Subsequently experimenters
found that adenine and guanine could form from hydrogen cyanide, given the right
conditions.  RNA can replicate itself in the right conditions [7]. The difficulty, of
course, is how to derive complex molecules from these relatively simple substrates,
although authors like  Thomas Cech believe that these details will be discovered
in time; more importantly, perhaps, Cech believes that life originated relatively
easily and spontaneously as a result of the chemistry of the early Earth.  He also
suggests that different forms of life with different chemistry would have arisen,
and then been extinguished, but he claims “I am much less sure that each of these
origins would have been chemically identical. … We have in our natural history
one solution that persisted” [8]. Other scientists are more in favor of life emerging on some form of solid surface, such as that of iron-sulfur pyrite. According to
this hypothesis, organic compounds attached to pyrite surfaces and then reacted to
form cellular aggregates.1
Cech’s suggestion that one form of chemical life persisted is illustrative of the
way the evolutionary paradigm has reached down to a molecular level of explanation
at the beginning of the emergence of life. He even believes that original new forms
of life are still attempting to emerge even in the contemporary context, billions
of years after life first began on Earth. Hence, he suggests that life is an intrinsic
property of small organic molecules, emerging through self-assembly, eventually giving rise to complex forms. The difficulty, of course, is the directionality
of that self-assembly towards greater and greater complexity. For example, while
self-organizing properties are a function of matter, what makes such spontaneous
self-organization shift towards greater and greater complexity? What is the source
of such tendency towards evolutionary complexity? Radu Popa suggests that seeming purposeful behavior in the evolution of life is derived from the enhancement
 See P. Ulmschneider. From Common Origins to the Future of Humanity (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2003), p. 98.

1

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The alpha and the omega

99

of energy flows that are possible in more complex systems [1] (pp. 134–135).
He strongly resists any suggestion that purposefulness is divine in origin, rather
that over time the system stabilized in such a way as to have a vectorial tendency.
This implies, of course, that life is a natural consequence of the restraints set up by
physical laws, and these drive the origin of life. However, this seems to be a tautology. It stands to reason that complex life apparently goes against the second law of
 thermodynamics towards greater entropy, but in order to obey that physical law it
must, of necessity, have enhanced energy flows. It seems unconvincing that energy
flows in themselves are responsible for shifts towards greater complexity, for each
level of organization will have its own properties distinctive for that level.
Debates about the origin of life are fascinating as they are situated at the borderland between discussions of cosmological and evolutionary theories. Physicists
have often been more prepared to bring in theistic language in order to explain the
remarkable set of coincidences that seem to have come together in order to make
the Earth a planet fit for life, one where life is physically possible at all. For the
Earth to be able to sustain life it needs to be close enough to an energy source so
that there is sufficient heat, but not so far removed that it is locked in a frozen state.
Overall, the combination of conditions found are appropriate for life as we know
it, including the range of temperatures needed for liquid water to be present. The
Earth, unsurprisingly, is situated in a “habitable zone,” and other physical properties such as gravity, the distance of the Moon from the Earth, the lifetime of the
Sun, and numerous other properties are “just right” for life to emerge. Physicists
have called such a tendency the “anthropic principle,” though more accurately it
should be named the “life principle,” for it specifies the conditions right for life to
emerge. The question remains, why did such laws emerge in the Universe in the
way they did, given the variety of other possible physical laws ?
 6.3 Is God a designer?
Given the multiple physical coincidences required to make life feasible at all, some
physicists who are theists have returned to the idea of God as master Designer.
Such ideas have been discredited historically, especially in the biological sphere,
because processes of  natural selection could explain those complex functions in
biology that seemed to point to design [9]. Where design arguments are used as
evidence for the existence of God the territory becomes even shakier, for once scientists find a biological or physical explanation, God seems superfluous to requirements. This is exactly what happened in the aftermath of Darwin to vestiges of
natural theology remaining from the previous centuries. What about the origin
of life itself? Does this suggest a master Designer in terms of molecules that are
just right for life to emerge? Or perhaps it is even illicit to make such attempts

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

100

Celia Deane-Drummond

to synthesize life, as these amount to forms of “playing God” with the order in
the Universe, dabbling with that momentous change towards life from non-life?
Debates still exist, of course, regarding whether life emerging from inorganic origins was a relatively “easy” process or highly improbable, given the particular
physical conditions at the time. It is important to scrutinize the evidence so far and
ask how far are such combinations of molecular mixes likely to have been around
in the sequence suggested. Some biologists believe that the combination of events
needed is sufficiently unlikely to be highly improbable, amounting almost to a
“miraculous” understanding of life’s origins, and in this sense, not really definitive
as far as science is concerned [10]. Other scientists working in the field are more
likely to be confident that a solution will be reached, and that over time they will
be able to fill in the gaps in the knowledge of how life began. All scientists aim
to arrive at a naturalistic explanation, but such a search should not be threatening
to theists. In fact, one might argue that if a full explanation was reached, then this
would in some ways serve a theological agenda, as it would effectively remove
any sense that God intervenes at the start of the process (non-life to life) and then
leaves it to organize itself to greater complexity through the processes of natural
evolution. The latter view amounts to Deism, that is, God is simply one who starts
off the process in the beginning.
How can we envisage God acting in such circumstances? Perhaps the most helpful way of viewing God is to envisage God as the foundation of all Being, including the foundation of physical and biological laws. Arthur Peacocke suggests that
a rewriting of the book of Genesis needs to include the idea of the origin of life,
so that following a survey of the way the Earth has come into being according to
cosmology he suggests that “in some wet deep crevice, or pool, or deep in the sea,
just over three billion years ago some molecules became large and complex enough
to make copies of themselves and become the first specks of life” [11] (p. 1). Is this
way of re-reading Genesis necessarily helpful, except in a metaphorical sense by
contrast with the original text? This first book of the Bible was never intended to be
a story about early cosmology, but rather a story written in order to affirm Israelite
faith in a God who acts decisively in history in contrast to the prevalent Babylonian
creation myths whose gods struggled with evil in the creation of the world. The
God as envisaged in the Biblical account is a God who affirms the goodness of the
material world and is the author of all that is. Belief in God as Creator was assumed
by the early Israelites; hence the creation story in Genesis reminded believers that
God was Lord of their history, a history that was rooted in the beginning of the
creation of the world. The Genesis text speaks of life as a gift of God to all of creation, and to humanity in particular, being made in the image of God. While the title
of Peacocke’s book might imply that he supports natural theology, i.e. arguments
for God’s existence from reflection on the natural world, he is ready to admit that

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The alpha and the omega

101

any hints at God’s presence as discerned in science are only partial and fallible
[11] (p. 127). The best we might say, perhaps, is that such scientific discoveries clear
the way for the acceptance of theism, rather than point to theism itself.
Peacocke is correct, in my view, to resist any notion of “Intelligent Design,”
that is, the view that given the complexity of molecular pathways in the emergence
of life, it must have been created all at once [11] (p. 69). These notions of special
creation hark back to the earlier natural theologies in unhelpful ways, resurrecting
a concept that is both naïve theologically and scientifically. In such circumstances
even contemporary natural theologies of  Intelligent Design become matters for
historical curiosity as to their social and public significance, rather than their intellectual achievement. The reaction against such a move is to ignore theological
engagement with the natural world altogether, but such problems can be avoided by
reinstating the notion of a theology of nature that views any notions of “design” as a
sequel to faith, rather than its anticipation. Perhaps Peacocke is a little too confident
that all the answers to the early origin of life have been discovered through principles of self-organization. It seems to me that there are far more gaps in scientific
understanding than he implies, but this does not open the window for more spurious notions of Intelligent Design. 
The question that needs to be addressed in such a context is how God can be
envisaged as continually active in the cosmos without intervening in a way that
contravenes natural physical laws as understood according to contemporary science. Keith Ward believes that evolution by natural selection is too precarious a
process to account for its directionality [12]. What about the biological phenomenon of  convergence? According to this view different species that have developed along very different evolutionary paths have seemingly come up with the
same functional solution to a particular problem, even though the genetic basis
may be very different [13]. Such convergence  also suggests constraints within the
biological processes that are not amenable to purely physical explanations, though
precisely how these restraints are derived is a matter of further research. To envisage God as simply the creator of these physical or biological laws seems too paltry
an explanation, rather God could be envisaged as resonating with life, luring life
towards a particular future as affirmed by God. This resonance is perhaps on a different plane of reality than that discovered by science. This is not vitalism, as the
latter assumes that a “life force” is required in the biological explanation of reality.
Rather, this is viewing life from a theological as well as a biological point of view.
I have suggested that this resonance of God with the created world might be named
as God’s Wisdom.2
 Arguments for this position are outside the scope of this chapter. For detailed theological justification see
C.  Deane-Drummond. Creation Through Wisdom (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 2000).

2

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

102

Celia Deane-Drummond

Wolfhart Pannenberg argues in Towards a Theology of Nature that a theology
of nature needs to relate nature in its entirety to God, which includes a scientific
understanding of natural processes [14] (p. 73). Note that he used the term theology
of nature, i.e. a theological reflection on the significance of nature, unlike natural
theology, i.e. an argument for God from contemplation of nature, often associated
with God as designer. Contemporary theologians, reluctant to “burn their fingers,”
have avoided dealing with the subject of nature. Pannenberg views any concept of
ordered fixed regularity of the Universe as resting on mistaken Greek notions of
the cosmos. Instead he suggests that the Hebrew notion of God is one that stresses
the contingency of divine will. He asks if contingent occurrences in some sense
also disclose regularity. The “laws” of physics, he suggests, need to be considered
under the category of contingency, for “only in this way would it be convincing that
the order of the laws of nature on its part also is comprehended by the thought of
creation and is not opposed to it” [14] (p. 79). In other words, the historical experience of Israel is of a God who acts powerfully in the midst of contingent events,
so that while connections in occurrences arise, these only become visible from the
end. Hence, he excludes the idea of purposefulness that directs everything from
the beginning, for he believes that such forms of purposefulness amount to a loss
of contingency. At the same time he does allow for “partial development tendencies within the total process” [14] (p. 83). Of course, his position means that in
some sense the new enters from ahead, rather than from the past, so that forms are
“overformed” by the new, rather than broken by them. This view is also implicit
in his suggestion that the direction in evolution towards greater complexity comes
through “field effects,” rather than being implicit within the evolving species themselves [14] (p. 47). The concept of field effects seem to be taken from scientists who
are on the more speculative end of the spectrum, and in the biological sphere at
least, are not very convincing. 
 6.4 Ethical issues in the origin and future of life
What are the ethical issues associated with the origin-of-life experiments? So far
the attempts to recreate life in the laboratory have been a painstaking affair, with
initial concerns about  contamination from existing microbial life forms interfering with the results. It therefore seems highly improbable that any fragile life so
created would itself serve as a source of  contamination for existing life, though
presumably if a highly robust form of self-replicating molecules was created, then
this would generate some ethical concerns. Nanotechnology, which takes advantage of the molecular level of chemical interactions, could potentially produce such
autocatalytic self-replicating systems that would not be classified as  “life” by most
definitions, but might serve to generate environmental or health risks in the wrong

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The alpha and the omega

103

contexts, or even possibly be used inappropriately in terrorist attacks. Hence, if the
process could lead to a disruption of the natural world in which we find ourselves,
then it needs to be monitored very carefully, especially if that multiplication cannot
be adequately controlled.
I have argued above that attempts to create life should not be seen as a threat,
rather they need to be welcomed as a way of removing the last traces of either a
false deism, where God simply starts the process off and leaves it to evolve itself,
or a false  argument from design, where the intricacy of life encourages a belief
that the first creative act in the evolution of life was a miraculous intervention
by God. Both of these generate forms of theology that are naïve. Nonetheless,
if humanity does discover a way of creating life, such a discovery needs to be
used responsibly, with due account of the application of any such research. In
addition, the overall budget expenditure on such research needs to be appropriate, and reflect both the gain in knowledge that this will bring, and the practical
advantages. All aspects of research are now heavily competitive, and it is often
tempting for scientists who are committed to a particular research project to exaggerate or even distort the benefits for humanity in order to win public support and
funding. This tendency is ultimately a disservice for the science community, for
it ultimately leads to mistrust when the purported benefits are not forthcoming in
the way originally projected.
The above also relates to the importance of intention when discerning whether
an action is ethical or not. Hence, it is not enough just to decide whether a particular action is technically feasible, but why do the scientists want to do the research
in the first place? Is it going to serve not only their career interests, or satisfy curiosity, but is it also going to contribute to the public good in some way? Of course,
there needs to be a place for more theoretical research that has, at first sight, little
or no practical application. Yet where public money is being used in order to fund
a major project, then that funding needs to be publicly accountable in the light of
expenditure on other areas of concern to the human community. In addition, the
outcome in terms of public good needs to be inclusive of environmental values that
should inform the way research is conducted. It is, I suggest, inappropriate and irresponsible to litter stellar space or other planets with debris from failed attempts at
space exploration. Hence, suggestions to set up conservation areas within ­planetary
space are to be welcomed [15]. Perhaps one of the drives towards  terraforming
Mars and other planets is less about the very long-term future of millions of years
before the Earth ceases to be habitable, and more about trying to find a technological solution to runaway exploitation of the Earth’s resources. Searching for ways
of  terraforming other planets should not, in other words, serve to weaken human
ethical responsibility for this Earth, and attempts to conserve biodiversity on Earth,
as well as other natural resources.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

104

Celia Deane-Drummond

In this I would support ideas that argue for the intrinsic goodness for the Earth
and the Universe as such, rather than confining the concept of the good to the
human community alone. Such an affirmation follows from Christian belief in
God as Creator of the Universe, so that there is a sense that all that is, is good. It
might be tempting for theologians to drop the notion of God as Creator, given the
naturalistic explanations of the origin of the Universe, alongside ­pseudo-scientific
assertions by  Creationists and those who adhere to Intelligent Design. I suggest that the Genesis account is not so much a story about how the Earth and
the Universe came into being, but ways of valuing that Universe in the light of
the involvement of God in the human story. The material world is not evil, as the
Manicheans thought, who supposed that spiritual Enlightenment comes through
detachment from the created world in which we live. Rather, Christian belief in the
incarnation of God in the material world in Christ reinforces the Hebrew notion
of the world declared good in the beginning of the creation of the world. Given
the goodness of the created world, it follows that actions that serve to destroy or
deface it are to be resisted. Would introducing life on Mars change the goodness
of Mars as a pristine environment where no life has previously existed? Does a
lifeless world have value?
Those who argue for the intrinsic worth of those outside the human community
have sometimes been accused of giving equal worth to all aspects of the natural
order, and of not being able to discriminate between them. I would suggest that it
is possible to hold to the notion of intrinsic value, while also being able to discriminate between different forms of life and non-life in terms of their worth. Only
those who hold that the entire world is sacred would suggest that it is untouchable,
and cannot be changed at all from its original ordering. A more helpful theological
approach is to understand the world as sacrament, that is, one that points to God
for those of faith. In this scenario, effecting change in the world is permitted, but
not indiscriminately. Dilemmas about how far to change planetary space need to
be considered in the light of the experience of human intervention on the Earth.
Many of the changes introduced on the Earth had unforeseen consequences, even
though they were done with the best of intentions at the time. Some of these consequences were accidental in this sense, though others have been carried out even
while knowing what the environmental consequences might be.
According to the Christian tradition, it would be impossible to eradicate the
human propensity for sin; hence the possibility of deliberate acts of environmental destruction on other planets cannot be ruled out. The experience of how the
Earth has been treated, in spite of the knowledge of what one should do needs to
be taken into account.  Mary Midgley argues that our lack of responsibility for the
Earth in spite of knowing what to do arises from an individualistic and competitive
philosophy, fueled by notions arising from socio-biology that seem to support an

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The alpha and the omega

105

ethic based on self-interest [16]. Much of the futurist projections by those writing
about  terraforming other planets fail to take this into account, and hence project an
unrealistic picture of harmony and cooperation between peoples in the process of
colonization. Given the timescale that is available for exploring space, according
to estimates of the lifespan of the Earth, and the human propensity for mistakes,
either deliberate or unintended, it would make sense to make any such changes
very carefully and slowly. Midgley argues that we need to regain a vision of the
Earth as the community in which humanity is situated, and learn the lesson of
cooperation by reflection on the planet in terms of  James Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis. This hypothesis argues that the planet is only fit for life because of the activity
of the biota, hence it is not simply a matter of life adapting to the Earth, but life
changing the environmental conditions to make it fit for life. Moving living things
into inhabitable planets would take this one step further, as it would amount to
shifting a planet that is dead to one that is “living.” Of course, there is some debate
as to how far Gaia is operative as a living organism, and I would resist ideas that
imply Gaia has any  teleology or consciousness in the way that is sometimes suggested. In addition, far from giving us an example of cooperation, Gaia could be
interpreted as fostering the heightened value of microbial life, as these organisms
are primarily responsible for atmospheric stabilization. I am less convinced than
Midgley  appears to be that a vision of Gaia is of any assistance in formulating an
ethical basis for cooperative behavior. I will argue below that the virtue of  prudence, which looks to the common good, is required for this kind of complex decision making where there are multiple and competing interests.
Given that these changes will need to be made slowly and over a long timescale,
a further ethical consideration that needs to be borne in mind is our responsibility
for future generations. Rachel Muers has discussed the question of responsibility
towards future generations in a helpful article in connection with current environmental problems [17]. Some of this discussion is relevant to particular questions about environmental issues in terraforming other planets and solar systems.
Discussion of the responsibility to future generations in a modern context is related
to our ability to change the conditions possible for human existence by our impacts
on the external environment. Does exploitation of other planets and creation of new
human communities represent a radical break with the past, a moving into a new
human future that is unprecedented, in such a way that those future persons will
barely recognize themselves in their historical antecedents? Or is it a continuum
with respect to human history as humanity has always and will continuously press
towards a goal of progress? Is it a destabilization of what it means to be human
or not? The conditions for social existence are likely to break down where there
is environmental collapse on Earth, but where other planets become our home
there is the additional risk of alienation of humanity from itself. Moreover, any

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

106

Celia Deane-Drummond

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

extra-planetary environmental pollution event would be much harder to contain if
the environmental conditions were themselves dependent on  artificial life support
systems.
While there is an intuitive sense that we have responsibilities towards future generations, this clashes with the difficulty of giving any such future persons rights, or
other contractual means of having a relationship with those existing in the present.
It is one area where rights language comes up against its own limits, reciprocity
is impossible, and we reach a point where most philosophers would argue that it
makes little sense in speaking about “possible” persons as being objects of ethical
concern as expressed in the language of rights. Of course, in reproductive biology
“possible persons” as embryos have become objects of rights language, but the two
situations are different, for, short of freezing such embryos for another generation, discussion about future generations represents persons that have not yet even
begun to come into existence. Does a communitarian philosophy fare any better in
helping us decide about ethical responsibilities towards future generations? Muers
argues that it does not, for a community is itself bounded by particular limitations, including its propensity to break down and its inability to secure indefinite
­continuity [17]. But the intuition remains that there is a sense that we need some
way of taking into account the needs of future generations in arriving at ethical
decisions that are likely to be long term. Muers argues that secular philosophy has
failed to address ethical responsibility in this respect; it has reached its “limit.”
Theological ethics, by introducing the notion of the transcendent, offers a way of
reflecting on timeless values and shared meanings that actually makes consideration about future ­generations more relevant for ethical  concern.
6.5  Astrobiology and the search for wisdom
I will argue in this section that theology has a distinctive voice in these debates,
not only by recovering a sense of wisdom, but also in practical decision ­making
through the notion of  prudence, or practical wisdom [18]. Wisdom as a virtue in
the classic theological tradition is distinguished from prudence, for wisdom is also
one of the intellectual virtues of theoretical reason, along with understanding and
science. While prudence is wisdom in human affairs, wisdom pure and simple
surpasses this as it aims directly at God, at knowledge of divine things. It has the
facility to act as “judge” over all the sciences, both in the conclusions and premises.
For the secular scientist the failure to know is a simple result of the ­failure of
human reason. For Thomas  Aquinas, while we can know the relationship between
things and our minds, we can never penetrate fully into the mind of God, for “it
is too rich to be assimilated completely, it eludes the effort to comprehend it” [19].
Hence the unknowability of creation stems from the fact that God creates it. As

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The alpha and the omega

107

such creation only gives an imperfect picture of what God is like, we cannot ­simply
read off God from the world in the manner implied by much contemporary science
and religion writing. In addition, our minds are too crude an instrument to fathom
the true nature of things; hence it is also because human beings are created that
they cannot know fully the divine mind in things. Such a view does not lead to
agnosticism, because it presupposes the idea of a Creator, but an awareness that we
are always “on the way.” Nor does it lead to a rejection of science, for even in its
imperfect form creation shows the light of God as if it were in a mirror. How can
we best describe this search for knowledge that is also a search into the mind of
God? I suggest that such a search can be described in terms of wisdom. For wisdom
is also an expression of the eternal mind of God, while at the same time affirming
what can be known in creaturely existence. For  Aquinas science is distinct from
the gift of wisdom in that science is about the certitude of judgment that arises out
of human or created things, while wisdom is judgment about the highest cause,
namely God.
Prudence, or practical wisdom for  Aquinas is the “mother” of all the other
­cardinal virtues. It might be hard to imagine that prudence is in any sense a prerequisite to goodness, since prudence in colloquial use implies a hesitation, or even
small-minded concerns about oneself. In contrast, the classical approach links prudence specifically with goodness, moreover there is no justice or courage without
the virtue of prudence. Instinctive inclinations towards goodness become transformed through prudence, so that prudence gives rise to a perfected ability to make
choices. Hence the free activity of humanity is good in so far as it corresponds to
the pattern of prudence. Drawing on memory and experience, prudence has the
facets of taking counsel, judging correctly and then moving to act in a certain
way. Prudence also includes practical execution of what has been decided upon. It
seems to me that the holistic task of prudence that serves to inform moral behavior
is vitally important, for it invites self-reflection at every stage in the overall process
from deliberation through to action. This applies in a particularly poignant way in
astrobiology, where discussions about what should be done are taking place even
prior to the possibility of their actual technical achievement. There are also no
absolutes in prudence, so that there will always be a small measure of risk in any
decision making, even if this decision is a prudent one.
Prudence demands openness to others in a way that prevents it from being individualistic, for taking counsel is the first part in the overall process of prudential
activity. Those who are prudent take counsel and are “well advised.” Such a characteristic is relevant in the present context, which is seeking to integrate different
ways and approaches and arrive at provisional conclusions that are of fundamental
significance for the future of life. In a similar way Aquinas believes that sound
judgment is a subsidiary or “allied” virtue to prudence [20] (p. 51.3). In the context

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

108

Celia Deane-Drummond

of astrobiology, we need to ask, what might “sound judgment” mean? The gift of
science can be related to the judging activity in prudence, just as the deliberating
activity is related to the gift of counsel. In as far as a person comes to know God
through created things, this is the office of the gift of science, but the judgment
of created things in the light of divine things is the gift of wisdom. This distinction is of great interest in the light of attempts by scientists to find God through
cosmology. Thomas would suggest that such intimations of divine reality are the
result of the gift of science, but while science might give knowledge as to what one
might believe, wisdom affords a deeper relationship with God in a way that science
cannot. Hence, he is able to qualify both the provision and the limits of scientific
knowledge.
I suggest that accurate cognition at the first stage of prudential activity is not
easily acquired, but comes gradually through patient effort in experience, one that
cannot be short-circuited by an appeal to “faith” or a particular “philosophical”
view. This silent contemplation of reality that takes counsel in all kinds of ways
also includes the ability to be true to memory, meaning not just the recollection
of the past, but one that is true to the nature of things. Aquinas lists the various
components of prudence as memory, insight or intelligence, teachableness, acumen
(solertia), reasoned judgment, foresight, circumspection and caution [20] (p. 49).
Beyond this Aquinas distinguishes between individual prudence, aimed at the good
of the individual, domestic prudence for family life and political prudence, aimed
at the common good (p. 47.11). Relating the three aspects of prudence, individual,
domestic, and political, is particularly significant in an ethics of astrobiology that
includes decision making at all levels, from the individual decision of particular
scientists, through to political decision making about funding and so on.
Aquinas distinguishes between imprudence, negligence, and sham prudence.
Different types of imprudence are a result of imperfections at any stage in the process of deliberation, judgment, and action. If there is a failure to take counsel, this
leads to foolish haste, if there is a failure in judgment this leads to thoughtlessness,
if there is a failure to carry out an action this leads to inconstancy. Flaws at any
stage of taking counsel, judging, and action lead to analogous vices. Imperfections
of prudence at the first stage of cognition come about through a failure to be still
in order to perceive reality. At the root of all these vices lies unchastity, that is
the failure to be detached from the seduction of pleasures of sense [20] (p. 53.6).
Prudence as a virtue overcomes this vice in allowing reasoning to order the moral
life. Aquinas associated the vice of curiositas with magic, an addiction to the sense
of pleasure from knowing. It is a desire to know that becomes obsessive and eclipses
other human responsibilities. Given the fascination of astrobiology and its potential to arouse the imagination, there is always this implicit danger, namely that it
will become detached from more practical issues and responsibilities on Earth.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

The alpha and the omega

109

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

The virtue that needs to be cultivated instead is studiositas, a love of learning and
knowledge that has its proper place. Yet another implicit danger in considering the
future of life on other planets is the mode of imprudence expressed as thoughtlessness, acting too quickly without sufficient time for consideration. Like the subsidiary virtues of prudence, such as well-advisedness, negligence is a subsidiary
outcome of imprudence. Those who fail to act at all by irresoluteness are also lacking perfected prudence, as are those who cannot act in unexpected circumstances,
who lack what is known as solertia (acumen) or clear sighted objectivity in the face
of the unexpected. Given the nature of unknowns in space exploration, the virtue
of solertia is vitally needed in order to act in an ethically responsible way. Sham
prudence is prudence directed to the wrong end, namely “the flesh” set up as the
final goal of the human life. If the real goal of a particular project is to make financial gains and exploit other planets, regardless of the life forms that they bear, this
would be a form of sham prudence. Sham prudence also comes through using false
or deceitful means, namely cunning, to attain either a good or evil end. The underlying sin in the case of sham prudence is covetousness, the desire to have what is
not rightfully one’s own. This tendency would exist where there are exaggerated
claims for success in order to win public support and funding, as mentioned above.
While it is difficult, given the multifaceted nature of prudence, to do justice to it
through a simple definition, Pieper has come close through his summary of many
aspects of prudence in the following paragraph:
It holds within itself the humility of the silent, that is to say, of unbiased perception, the
trueness to being of memory, the art of receiving counsel, alert, composed readiness for
the unexpected. Prudence means studied seriousness and, as it were, the filter of deliberation, and at the same time the brave boldness to make final decisions. It means purity,
straightforwardness, candor and simplicity of character, it means standing superior to the
utilitarian complexities of mere “tactics” [21] (p. 36).

Given this understanding of prudence, such a task would be almost impossible
given the propensity to err (sin) in all its varied facets without Aquinas’s belief that
perfection in prudence is only possible through the grace of God. The form of prudence to which the Christian aspires is prudence in the light of the three theological
virtues of faith, hope, and charity. Prudence as learned and prudence perfected by
grace both move from cognition through to decision, volition, and action. This is
where the virtue of prudence as learned links with the theological virtues of faith,
hope, and love. Commentators on prudence in Aquinas seem to have ignored the
possibility of prudence acting under the influence of God’s grace, it has proved
to be an embarrassment to modern readers, preferring to align themselves with
secular concepts of prudence. However, if  Christian ethics is to move beyond a
simple endorsement of secular models, then some sense of the possibility at least

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

110

Celia Deane-Drummond

of prudence given by grace is not only necessary, but vital in thinking through
difficult ethical questions. Such a rich understanding of prudence when combined
with love of God in charity leads to a higher plane of prudence, one that is detached
from the compulsions of worldly desires. This does not come from human judgment about the world, such disdain would stem from arrogance and pride. Rather,
it is the overwhelming love of God that relativizes all human efforts, while at the
same time holding a clear perspective on human obligation and responsibility. I
prefer to call this form of prudence wisdom, since it can be more readily identified
as a theological category [22].
Unlike approaches within  Christian ethics that refer to particular traditions or
principles that seem unrelated to practical contexts, prudence demands full encounter with experience, including the experience of science, taking time to perceive
what is true in the natural world. While Aquinas restricted his idea of taking counsel to other human subjects, in an environmental context it is essential to try as far
as possible to perceive from the perspective of all creatures, all of whom are loved
by God and under God’s providence. Hence, any discussion of the future of life
needs to include not just what is good for humanity, but also what might be good for
other creatures that share our planetary home. Prudence is also helpful in discriminating between different life forms in terms of their relative intrinsic value. The
role of microorganisms in stabilization of the planet might warn against too hasty
a dismissal of microbial life as being of lesser value than higher life forms, though
evolutionary complexity is indicative of a greater sentience and consciousness that
needs to be taken into account.
Consequentialist approaches to the ethics of nature have sought to frame decisions in terms of costs and benefits, or risks. While prudence would include some
perception of risks where they are known, the ability to have accurate foresight
depends on how far such decisions promote the overall goal of prudence towards
goodness. In other words, it is the character of the agents that is as important as the
particular consequences of individual decisions made. Hence, the good of humanity is included along with the goods of other creatures. While those who are not
Christian will be able to identify with the goal of goodness, a Christian virtue ethic
springing from prudence will seek to move to a particular understanding of goodness, one that coheres with the overall goodness for creation, as well as goodness
for humanity.
A discussion of the significance of prudence  for ethical decision making about
the future of life would not be complete without brief mention of the cardinal virtue
of justice. Justice is often split off from a consideration of virtue ethics, as it is more
commonly associated with rule-based ethics. I suggest, alternatively, from the side
of virtue ethics, that when considered as a virtue to be developed justice gives consideration of rules and principles a proper place in an overall ethical framework.

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

The alpha and the omega

111

Justice is concerned broadly with the idea that each is given her/his due. Unlike
many other virtues, justice specifically governs relationships with others, and also
unlike other virtues it is possible to act justly without necessarily having a proper
attitude towards that action. A particular rule or pattern for prudence prescribes
what is a just deed according to reason, and if this is written down it becomes law.
Consideration of the legal framework to protect life on other planets needs to be
considered in any international treaty set up in order to regulate space exploration
and colonization. The jus gentium is constituted by natural reason and shared by all
people, equivalent to what we might today term international law. 

Copyright © 2009. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

6.6  Conclusions
I have argued that scientific questions at the beginning of life on Earth still fall short
of full explanation as to what might have happened in the earliest history of the
Earth. From the perspective of Christian theology any discovery of natural causes
for the shift towards life from organic molecular precursors would be welcomed, as
it would remove any vestiges of deism or theories of Intelligent Design that are far
removed from a theology of nature. I have suggested that attempting to derive God
from gaps in our understanding of the nature of functional complexity either at the
start of life or throughout evolutionary change is mistaken. Theology is important,
however, in as much as from the perspective of faith it can give meaning to the directionality of evolution, challenging the notion of purposelessness that is implicit
in much evolutionary philosophy. There are also theological questions about the
meaning of humanity and humanity’s future raised by our search for other planetary homes. I have argued that from the perspective of Christian theology all of creation needs to be viewed as good, given as a gift of God, though not necessarily for
human instrumental use, but good in its own right. Where there is conflict between
ethical demands between species, or between different life forms, then the virtue of
prudence or practical wisdom is especially relevant. Prudence includes deliberation,
judgment, and action, hence it includes elements of scientific forms of reasoning,
but seeks to go beyond this by seeking a more holistic approach to complex issues.
A Christian virtue approach to the ethics of future life is, it seems to me, a more
satisfying way of reasoning compared with principled approaches that can seem
detached from secular discussion, or consequentialist approaches that view decision
making simply in terms of risks and benefits. Above all, as a human community, we
should not give up on the search for wisdom, for wisdom allows an integration of
religious and scientific ways of thinking about the Universe in a way that can inform
future visions. Such visions need to be derived from a settled sense of meaning and
identity that comes from knowing one’s place in the cosmos, rather than a desperate
search for cosmic immortality that resists human finitude. 

Exploring the Origin, Extent, and Future of Life : Philosophical, Ethical and Theological Perspectives, Cambridge University Press,
2009. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=461116.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:11:56.

