Interlude—God in the Gaps
Darwinists rarely mention the whale because it presents
them with one of their most insoluble problems. They
believe that somehow a whale must have evolved from
an ordinary land-dwelling animal, which took to the sea
and lost its legs.
. . . . A land mammal that was in the process of becoming a whale would fall between two stools—it would
not be fitted for life on land or sea, and would have no
hope of survival.
Alan Haywood, 1985

Copyright © 2005. Joseph Henry Press. All rights reserved.

T

his rant by Alan Haywood, and similar silly statements by his
creationist colleagues, reveals a deep mistrust of the scientific
description of life’s emergence and evolution. But he is correct in
one sense. Science is a slave to rigorous logic and inexorable
continuity of argument. If life has changed over time, evolving
from a single common ancestor to today’s biological diversity,
then many specific predictions about intermediate life-forms must
follow. For example, transitional forms between land mammals
and whales must have existed sometime in the past. According to
the creationists in the mid-1980s, the lack of such distinctive
forms stood as an embarrassing, indeed glaring, proof of
evolution’s failure. Their conclusion: God, not Darwinian evolution, must have bridged the gap between land and marine animals. But what appeared to them as an embarrassment for science
then, has since underscored the power of the scientific method.
Science differs from other ways of knowing because scientific
reasoning leads to unambiguous, testable predictions. As
Haywood so presciently predicted, whales with atrophied hind
legs must have once swum in the seas. If Darwin is correct, then
77

Genesis : The Scientific Quest for Life's Origins, Joseph Henry Press, 2005. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=4388347.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:13:39.

Copyright © 2005. Joseph Henry Press. All rights reserved.

78

GENESIS

somewhere their fossils must lie buried. Furthermore, those
strange creatures must have arisen during a relatively narrow interval of geological time, bounded by the era before the earliest
known marine mammals (about 60 million years ago) and the
appearance of streamlined whales of the present era (which appear in the fossil record during the past 30 million years). Armed
with these predictions, several paleontologists plotted expeditions
into the field and targeted their search on shallow marine formations from the crucial gap between 35 and 55 million years ago
for new evidence in the fossil record. Sure enough, in the past
decade paleontologists have excavated more than a dozen of
these “missing links” in the development of the whale—curious
creatures that sport combinations of anatomical features characteristic to both land and sea mammals.
Moving back in time, one such intermediate form is the 35million-year-old Basilosaurus—a sleek, powerful, toothed whale.
This creature has been known for more than a century, but a recent discovery of an unusually complete specimen in Egypt for
the first time included tiny, delicate vestigial hind leg bones. That’s
a feature without obvious function in the whale, but such atrophied legs provide a direct link to four-limbed ancestral land
mammals.
And then a more primitive whale, Rodhocetus, discovered in
1994 in Pakistani sediments about 46 million years old, has more
exaggerated hind legs, not unlike those of a seal. And in that same
year paleontologists reported the new genus Ambulocetus, the
“walking whale.” This awkwardly beautiful 52-million-year-old
creature represents a true intermediate between land and sea
mammals.
Nor does the story end there. In September 2001, the cover
stories of both prestigious weekly magazines Science and Nature
trumpeted the discovery of a new proto-whale species that had
just been reported from rocks about 50 million years old. Nature’s
cover story, titled “When whales walked the earth,” underscores
the power of science and the futility of the creationists’ task. Science makes specific, testable predictions. Anyone can go out into
the natural world and test those predictions. The creationists were
wrong.
Today’s creationists have toted out a new version of this old

Genesis : The Scientific Quest for Life's Origins, Joseph Henry Press, 2005. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=4388347.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:13:39.

INTERLUDE—GOD IN THE GAPS

79

Ambulocetus

Copyright © 2005. Joseph Henry Press. All rights reserved.

Rodhocetus

Basilosaurus
The evolution of whales is illustrated by recent fossil finds, including Ambulocetus
(52 million years old), Rodhocetus (46 million years old), and Basilosaurus (35 million years old) (from National Academy of Sciences, 1999).

Genesis : The Scientific Quest for Life's Origins, Joseph Henry Press, 2005. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=4388347.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:13:39.

Copyright © 2005. Joseph Henry Press. All rights reserved.

80

GENESIS

“God-in-the-gaps” argument under the fancy name “intelligent
design.” Their argument goes like this. Life is so incredibly complex and intricate that it must have been engineered by a higher
being. No random natural process could possibly lead from nonlife to even the simplest cell, much less humans. The promoters,
notably Michael Behe and William Dembski, don’t talk about
“God,” but they leave open the question of who designed the
designers.
Such an argument is fatally flawed. For one thing, intelligent
design ignores the power of emergence to transform natural systems without conscious intervention. We observe emergent complexity arising all around us, all the time. True, we don’t yet know
all the details of life’s genesis story, but why resort to an unknowable alien intelligence when natural laws appear to be sufficient?
I also see a deeper problem with intelligent design, which I
believe trivializes God. Why do we have to invoke God every
time we don’t have a complete scientific explanation? I am
unpersuaded by a God who must be called upon to fill in the
gaps of our ignorance—between a cow and a whale, for example.
The problem with this view is that as we learn more, the gaps
narrow. As paleontologists continue to unearth new intermediate
transitional forms, God’s role is squeezed down to ever more
trivial variations and inconsequential modifications.
Isn’t it more satisfying to believe in a God who created the
whole shebang from the outset—a God of natural laws who
stepped back and doesn’t meddle in our affairs? In the beginning
God set the entire magnificent fabric of the universe into motion.
Atoms and stars and cells and consciousness emerged inexorably,
as did the intellect to discover laws of nature through a natural
process of self-awareness and discovery. In such a universe, scientific study provides a glimpse of creator as well as creation.

Genesis : The Scientific Quest for Life's Origins, Joseph Henry Press, 2005. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=4388347.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:13:39.

