5
Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin
of cellular life
David Deamer
University of California, Santa Cruz

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.1 Introduction
The main themes of this chapter concern the phenomenon of emergence, the origin
of life as a primary example of emergence, and how evolution begins with the
inception of cellular life. The physical properties of certain molecular species
are relevant to life’s origins, because these properties lead to the emergence of
more complex structures by self-assembly. One such property is the capacity of
amphiphilic molecules such as soap to form membranous boundary structures,
familiar examples being soap bubbles and cell membranes. A second example is
the chemical bonding that allows biopolymers such as nucleic acids and proteins to
assemble into functional sequences. Self-assembly processes can produce complex
supramolecular structures with certain properties of the living state. Such structures
are able to capture energy available in the environment and initiate primitive
reactions associated with metabolism, growth, and replication. At some point
approximately 4 billion years ago, cellular compartments appeared that contained
macromolecular systems capable of catalysed growth and replication. Because each
cellular structure would be slightly different from all others, Darwinian evolution by
natural selection could begin, with the primary selective factor being competition
for energy and nutrients.
5.2 Deﬁning emergence
Researchers increasingly use the term emergence to describe processes by which
more complex systems arise from seemingly simpler systems, typically in an
unpredictable fashion. This usage is just the opposite of reductionism, the belief
that any phenomenon can be explained by understanding the parts of that system.
Although reductionism has been a powerful tool in the sciences, the concept of
emergence is also useful in referring to some of the most remarkable phenomena
that we observe in nature and in the laboratory.
Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, eds. Ralph E. Pudritz, Paul G. Higgs, and Jonathon R. Stone.
Published by Cambridge University Press. © Cambridge University Press 2007.
Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

90

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

One example is the way that orderly arrangements of molecules appear when
a relatively simple system of molecules undergoes a transition to a much more
complex system. For instance, if we add soap molecules to water, at ﬁrst there
is nothing present except the expected clear solution of individual molecules
dissolved in the water. At a certain concentration, additional molecules no longer
dissolve, but instead begin to associate into small aggregates called micelles. As the
concentration increases further, the micelles begin to grow into membranous layers
that cause the originally clear solution to become turbid. Finally, if air is blown
through a straw into the solution, much larger structures appear at the surface, the
soap bubbles that are familiar to everyone.
Such emergent phenomena are called self-assembly processes, or sometimes
self-organization. Typically the process is spontaneous, but in other instances an
input of energy is required to drive self-assembly. One of the deﬁning characteristics
of an emergent property is the element of unpredictability. If we did not know by
observation that soap molecules have properties of self-assembly, we could not have
predicted that micelles would be produced simply by increasing the concentration
of soap molecules in solution. Even knowing that micelles form, there is no physical
theory available that can predict exactly what concentration of soap is required to
form the micelles. And if soap bubbles were not such a common phenomenon,
we would be astonished by their appearance when a soap solution is disturbed by
addition of free energy in the form of an air stream.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.3 Emergence of life: a very brief history
The origin of life was strongly dependent on physical conditions of the early Earth
environment. Imagine that we could somehow travel back in time to the prebiotic
Earth 3.9 billion years ago. The ﬁrst thing we would notice is that it is very hot, with
temperatures near the boiling point of water. Impacting objects the size of comets
and asteroids add water, carbon dioxide, silicate minerals, and small amounts of
organic material to the planetary surface. They also produce craters on the Moon
that remain as a permanent record of the bombardment. The atmosphere has no
oxygen, but instead is a mixture of carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Land masses are
present, but they are volcanic islands resembling Hawaii or Iceland, rather than
continents. We are standing on one such island, on a beach composed of black lava
rocks, with tide pools containing clear seawater. We can examine the seawater in
the tide pools with a powerful microscope, but there is nothing to be seen, only a
dilute solution of organic compounds and salts. If we could examine the mineral
surfaces of the lava rocks, we would see that some of the organic compounds have
formed a ﬁlm adhering to the surface, while others assembled into aggregates that
disperse in the seawater.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.4 The ﬁrst emergent phenomena: self-assembly processes on the early Earth

91

Now imagine that we return 300 million years later. Not much has changed.
The primary land masses are still volcanic in origin, although small continents are
beginning to appear as well. The meteorite impacts have dwindled, and the global
temperature has cooled to around 70 ◦ C. We are surprised when we examine the tide
pools, in which a turbidity has appeared that was not apparent earlier, and the mineral
surfaces are coated with layers of pigmented ﬁlms. When we examine the water and
ﬁlms with our microscope, we discover immense numbers of bacteria present in
the layers. Life has begun.
What happened in the intervening time that led to the origin of life? This is a
fundamental question of biology, and the answer will change the way we think about
ourselves, and our place in the universe, because if life could begin on the Earth,
it could begin by similar processes on Earth-like planets circling other stars in our
galaxy. The origin of life is the most extraordinary example of emergent phenomena,
and the process by which life began must involve the same kinds of intermolecular
forces and self-assembly processes that cause soap to form membranous vesicles
and allow monomers like amino acids and nucleotides to form functional polymers.
The origin of life must also have incorporated the reactions and products that are
the result of energy ﬂowing through a molecular system, thereby driving it toward
ever more complex systems with emergent properties.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.4 The ﬁrst emergent phenomena: self-assembly processes
on the early Earth
All cellular life today incorporates two processes we will refer to here as selfassembly and directed assembly. The latter process always involves the formation
of covalent bonds by energy-dependent synthetic reactions, and requires that a
coded sequence in one type of polymer in some way directs the sequence of
monomer addition in a second polymeric species. The ﬁrst process – spontaneous
self-assembly – occurs when certain compounds interact through non-covalent
hydrogen bonds, electrostatic forces, and non-polar interactions to form closed
membrane-bounded microenvironments. The self-assembly of membranes is by
far the simplest of the processes associated with the origin of cellular life. It occurs
whenever lipid-like molecules are present in an aqueous environment, and does not
require the covalent bond formation needed for the synthesis of polymers such as
proteins and nucleic acids. For this reason, it is reasonable to assume that membrane
formation preceded the appearance of catalytic and replicating polymers. Boundary
structures and the compartments they produce make energy available in the form
of ion gradients, and can also mediate a selective inward transport of nutrients.
Furthermore, membranous compartments are, in principle, capable of containing
unique systems of macromolecules. If a replicating system of polymers could be

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

92

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

encapsulated within a membrane-bounded compartment, the components of the
system would share the same microenvironment, and the result would be a major
step toward cellularity, speciation, and true cellular function (Deamer and Oro,
1980; Morowitz et al., (1986); Morowitz, 1992; Dyson, (1995)).
We know very little about how this event might have occurred at the origin
of cellular life, but recent advances have provided clues about possible sources of
self-assembling molecules and processes by which large molecules can be captured
in membrane-bounded microenvironments. Here we will describe the chemical
and physical properties of such systems, and several experimental models that
incorporate certain properties related to the origin of cellular life.

5.5 Sources of amphiphilic molecules
The most striking examples of self-assembling molecules are called amphiphiles,
because they have both a hydrophilic (‘water loving’) group and a hydrophobic
(‘water hating’) group on the same molecule. Amphiphilic molecules are among
the simplest of life’s molecular components, and are readily synthesized by nonbiological processes. Virtually any hydrocarbon having ten or more carbons in its
chain takes on amphiphilic properties if one end of the molecule incorporates a polar
or ionic group. The simplest common amphiphiles are therefore molecules such as
soaps, more technically referred to as monocarboxylic acids. A good example is
decanoic acid, which is shown below with its ten carbon chain:

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

CH3 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –CH2 –COOH
McCollom et al. (1999) and Rushdi and Simoneit (2001) demonstrated that a
series of alkanoic acids and alcohols in this size range can be produced from very
simple organic compounds by Fischer–Tropsch reactions that simulate geothermal
conditions on the early Earth. It has been found that such molecules readily form
membranous vesicles, as shown in Figure 5.1 (Apel et al., 2002). This fact will
become important later when we discuss the emergence of cellular life.
Two possible sources of organic compounds on a primitive planetary surface
are delivery during late accretion, followed by chemical evolution, and synthesis
by geochemical processes in the early atmosphere or hydrosphere. Early
investigations focused on chemical synthesis of monomers common to the primary
macromolecules involved in living systems, with the goal of determining whether it
was possible that biologically relevant compounds were available on the primitive
Earth. Most of these studies emphasized water-soluble compounds such as amino
acids, nucleobases, and simple carbohydrates. The classic experiments of Miller
(1953) and Miller and Urey (1959) showed that amino acids such as glycine

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.5 Sources of amphiphilic molecules

93

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Fig. 5.1. Membranous vesicles are produced when simple amphiphilic molecules
are dispersed in aqueous solutions at neutral pH ranges. The vesicles shown here
are composed of a mixture of decanoic acid and decanol. Bar shows 20 µm.

and alanine could be obtained when a mixture of reduced gases was exposed
to an electrical discharge. The mixture was assumed to be a simulation of the
original terrestrial atmosphere which, by analogy with the outer planets, would
have contained hydrogen, methane, ammonia, and water vapour. At sufﬁciently
high energy ﬂuxes, such mixtures of reducing gases generate hydrogen cyanide
and formaldehyde, which in turn react to produce amino acids, purines, and a
variety of simple sugars.
The possibility that organic compounds could be synthesized under prebiotic
conditions was given additional weight when it was convincingly shown that
carbonaceous meteorites contained amino acids, hydrocarbons, and even traces
of purines (Kvenholden et al., 1970; Lawless and Yuen, 1979; Cronin et al.,
1988). Such meteorites are produced by collisions in the asteroid belt between
Mars and Jupiter. Asteroids range up to hundreds of kilometres in diameter, and
are examples of planetesimals that happened to avoid accretion into the terrestrial
planets. Asteroids and their meteoritic fragments therefore represent samples of the
primitive Solar System in which the products of prebiotic chemical reactions have
been preserved for over 4.5 billion years. It was reasonable to assume that similar
reactions and products were likely to have occurred on the Earth’s surface.
In the late 1970s it became increasingly clear that the archaean atmosphere
was largely of volcanic origin and composed of carbon dioxide and nitrogen

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

94

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

rather than the mixture of reducing gases assumed by the Miller–Urey model
(Holland, 1984; Kasting and Broun, 1998). This is consistent with the fact that
approximately 65 atmosphere equivalents of carbon dioxide are present in the
Earth’s crust as carbonate minerals, all of which must have passed through the
atmosphere at some point as a gaseous component. Carbon dioxide does not support
synthetic pathways leading to chemical monomers, so interest was drawn to the
second potential source of organic material, extraterrestrial infall in the form of
micrometeorites and comets. This was ﬁrst proposed by Oró (1961) and Delsemme
(1984) and more recently extended by Anders (1989) and Chyba and Sagan
(1992). The total organic carbon added by extraterrestrial infall over ∼108 years
of late accretion can be estimated to be in the rage of 1016 –1018 kg, which
is several orders of magnitude greater than the 12.5 × 1014 kg total organic
carbon in the biosphere (www.regensw.co.uk/technology/biomass-faq.asp). From
such calculations it seems reasonable that extraterrestrial infall was a signiﬁcant
source of organic carbon in the prebiotic environment. Even today meteorites and
interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) deliver organic materials to the modern Earth
at a rate of ∼106 kg/y−1 (Love and Brownlee, 1992; Maurette, 1998).
The discovery of biologically relevant compounds in meteorites also indicated
that organic synthesis can occur in the interstellar medium, which immediately
leads to the question of sources and synthetic pathways. The most important
biogenic elements (C, N, O, S, and P) form in the interiors of stars, then are
ejected into the surrounding interstellar medium (ISM) at the end of the star’s
lifetime during red giant, nova, and supernova phases. Following ejection, much
of this material becomes concentrated into dense molecular clouds from which
new stars and planetary systems are formed (Ehrenfreund and Charnley, 2000;
Sandford, 1996). At the low temperatures in these dark molecular clouds, mixtures
of molecules condense to form ice mantles on the surfaces of dust grains where they
can participate in additional chemical reactions. Comparison of infrared spectra
of low-temperature laboratory ices with absorption spectra of molecular clouds
indicates that interstellar ices are mainly composed of H2 O mixed with CO, CO2 ,
CH3 OH, NH3 , and other components, the last ingredients generally comprising
5–15% of the total. The ices are exposed to ionizing radiation in the form of
cosmic rays (and secondary radiation generated by their interaction with matter),
and ultraviolet photons from stars forming within the cloud.
Laboratory experiments have shown that illuminating such ices with ultraviolet
light leads to more complex molecular species (Greenberg and Mendoza-Gomez,
1993; Bernstein et al., 1995; Gerakines et al., 2000; Ehrenfreund et al., 1995).
Hundreds of new compounds are synthesized, even though the starting ices contain
only a few simple common interstellar molecules. Many of the compounds formed
in these experiments are also present in meteorites, comets, and 10 Ps, and some

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.6 The emergence of primitive cells

95

are relevant to the origin of life, including amino acids (Munoz-Caro et al.,
2002; Bernstein et al., 2002; Bernstein et al., 2001), and amphiphilic material
(Dworkin et al., 2001).
Although it is now clear that organic molecules are synthesized in dense
molecular clouds, the molecules must be delivered to habitable planetary surfaces if
they are to take part in the origin of life. This requires that they survive the transition
from the dense cloud into a protostellar nebula and subsequent incorporation
into planetesimals, followed by delivery to a planetary surface. During the late
bombardment period, which lasted until about 4 billion years ago, the amount of
extraterrestrial organic material brought to the prebiotic Earth was likely to have
been several orders of magnitude greater than current rates of infall (Chyba and
Sagan, 1992). Thus, the early Earth must have been seeded with organic matter
created in the interstellar medium, protosolar nebula, and asteroidal/cometary
parent bodies.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.6 The emergence of primitive cells
Life on the Earth most likely arose from vast numbers of natural experiments in
which various combinations of organic molecules were mixed and recombined
to form complex interacting systems, then exposed to sources of energy such as
light, heat, and oxidation–reduction potentials presented by donors and acceptors
of electrons. This mixing and recombination probably did not occur in free solution,
but rather in ﬂuctuating environments at aqueous–mineral interfaces exposed to the
atmosphere under conditions that would tend to concentrate the organic material so
that reactions could occur. Through this process, incremental chemical evolution
took place over a period of several hundred million years after the Earth had cooled
sufﬁciently for water vapour to condense into oceans. At some point, membranebounded systems of molecules appeared that could grow and reproduce by using
energy and nutrients from the environment. An observer seeing this endproduct
would conclude that such systems were alive, but would be unable to pinpoint the
exact time when the complex structures took on the property of life.
Here we will assume that the structures described above would be recognizable
cells, and that cellular compartments were required for life to begin. This assumption
differs from the conjectures of Kauffman (1993) and Wächtershäuser (1988) that
life began as a series of reactions resembling metabolism. In their view, autocatalytic
pathways were ﬁrst established, perhaps on mineral surfaces. Over time the systems
became increasingly complex to the point that self-reproducing polymers were
synthesized, with cellular compartments appearing at a later stage. There is as yet
little experimental evidence that allows a choice between the two perspectives of
‘compartments ﬁrst’ or ‘metabolism ﬁrst’. However, because membrane structures

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

96

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

readily self-assemble from amphiphilic compounds known to be present in mixtures
of organic compounds available on the prebiotic Earth, it is highly likely that
membranous compartments were among the ﬁrst biologically relevant structures
to appear prior to the origin of life.
Evidence from phylogenetic analysis suggests that microorganisms resembling
today’s bacteria were the ﬁrst form of cellular life. Traces of their existence can
be found in the fossil record in Australian rocks at least 3.5 billion years old. Over
the intervening years between life’s beginnings and now, evolution has produced
bacteria which are more advanced than the ﬁrst cellular life. The machinery of life
has become so advanced that when researchers began subtracting genes in one of the
simplest known bacterial species, they reached a limit of approximately 265–350
genes that appears to be the absolute requirement for contemporary bacterial
cells (Hutchinson et al., 1999). Yet life did not spring into existence with a full
complement of 300+ genes, ribosomes, membrane transport systems, metabolism,
and the DNA → RNA → protein information transfer that dominates all life today.
There must have been something simpler, a kind of scaffold life that was left behind
in the evolutionary rubble.
Can we reproduce that scaffold? One possible approach was suggested by the
RNA World concept that arose from the discovery of ribozymes, which are RNA
structures having enzyme-like catalytic activities. The idea was greatly strengthened
when it was discovered that the catalytic core of ribosomes is not composed
of protein at the active site, but instead is composed of RNA machinery. This
remarkable ﬁnding offers convincing evidence that RNA likely came ﬁrst, and then
was overlaid by more complex and efﬁcient protein machinery (Hoang et al., 2004).
Another approach to discovering a scaffold is to incorporate one or a few genes
into microscopic artiﬁcial vesicles to produce molecular systems that display certain
features associated with life. The properties of such systems may then provide clues
to the process by which life began in a natural setting of the early Earth. What would
such a system do? We can answer this question by listing the steps that would be
required for a microorganism to emerge as the ﬁrst cellular life on the early Earth:
• Boundary membranes self-assemble from amphiphilic molecules.
• Energy is captured either from light and a pigment system, or from chemical energy, or

both.
• Ion concentration gradients are produced and maintained across the membrane by an

energy-dependent process. The gradient is a source of energy to drive metabolism and
synthetic reactions.
• The energy is coupled to the synthesis of activated monomers, which in turn are used to
make polymers.
• Macromolecules are encapsulated, yet smaller nutrient molecules can cross the membrane
barrier.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.6 The emergence of primitive cells

97

• The macromolecules grow by polymerizing the nutrient molecules, using the energy of

metabolism.
• Macromolecular catalysts speed the metabolic reactions and growth processes.
• The macromolecular catalysts themselves are reproduced during growth.
• Information is contained in the sequence of monomers in one set of polymers, and this

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

set is duplicated during growth. The information is used to direct the growth of catalytic
polymers.
• The membrane-bounded system of macromolecules can divide into smaller structures.
• Genetic information is passed between generations by duplicating the sequences and
sharing them between daughter cells.
• Occasional errors (mutations) are made during replication or transmission of information
so that a population of primitive living organisms can evolve through selection.

Looking down this list, one is struck by the complexity of even the simplest form
of life. This is why it has been so difﬁcult to ‘deﬁne’ life in the usual sense of a
deﬁnition, i.e., boiled down to a few sentences in a dictionary. Life is a complex
system that cannot be captured in a few sentences, so perhaps a list of its observed
properties is the best we can ever hope to do. Given the list, one is also struck by the
fact that all but one of the functions – self-reproducing polymers – have now been
reconstituted individually in the laboratory. For instance, it was shown 40 years ago
that lipid vesicles self-assemble into bilayer membranes that maintain ion gradients
(Bangham et al., 1965). If bacteriorhodopsin is in the bilayer, light energy can be
captured in the form of a proton gradient (Oesterhelt and Stoeckenius, 1973). If
an ATP synthase is in the membrane, the photosynthetic system can make ATP
by coupling the proton gradient to form a pyrophosphate bond between ADP and
phosphate (Racker and Stoeckenius, 1974). Macromolecules such as proteins and
nucleic acids can be easily encapsulated and can function in the vesicles as catalysts
(Chakrabarti and Deamer, 1994) and as membrane transport agents. The system
can grow by addition of lipids, and can even be made to divide by imposing shear
forces, after which the vesicles grow again (Hanczyc et al., 2003). Macromolecules
like RNA can grow by polymerization in the vesicle, driven by catalytic proteins
(Monnard and Deamer, 2006). And ﬁnally, samples of cytoplasm from a living cell
like E. coli are easily captured, including ribosomes. A micrograph of such vesicles
is shown in Figure 5.2.
The ability to capture structures as large as ribosomes has led to attempts to
demonstrate translation in closed vesicles. This was ﬁrst achieved by Yu et al.
(2001) and later by Nomura et al. (2003), who captured samples of bacterial
cytoplasm from E. coli in large liposomes. The samples included ribosomes, tRNAs
and the hundred or so other components required for protein synthesis. The mRNA
containing the gene for green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) was also included in the mix,
which permitted facile detection of protein synthesis. The encapsulated translation

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

98

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Fig. 5.2. Ribosomes from E. coli encapsulated in phospholipid vesicles. The
vesicles were reconstituted from a detergent–lipid solution in the presence of
cytoplasmic extracts from the bacteria. Several ribosomes were present in each
vesicle. Micrograph courtesy of Z. Martinez.

systems worked, but only a few molecules of GFP were synthesized in each vesicle,
because the only amino acids available were those captured within the vesicle. This
limitation was resolved by Noireaux and Libchaber (2004), who included not only
the mRNA for GFP in the mix, but also a second mRNA coding for the pore-forming
protein alpha hemolysin. The hemolysin produced a channel in the lipid bilayer that
allowed externally added ‘nutrients’ in the form of amino acids and ATP to cross the
membrane barrier and supply the translation process with energy and monomers
(Figure 5.3). The system worked well, and GFP synthesis continued for as long as
four days.
These advances permit us to consider whether it might be possible to fabricate a
kind of artiﬁcial life which is reconstituted from a complete system of components
isolated from microorganisms. The system would by deﬁnition overcome the
one limitation described above, the lack of a self-reproducing set of polymers,
because everything in the system would grow and reproduce, including the
catalytic macromolecules themselves and the lipid components of the boundary
membrane. However, such a system requires that the genes for the translation
system (ribosomes, tRNA, and so on) for DNA replication and transcription, and
for lipid synthesis must all be present in a strand of synthetic DNA. When one adds
up the number of essential genes, the total is over a hundred. This might at ﬁrst
seem like a daunting task, but in fact it is within the realm of possibility, in that the
complete set of genes required to synthesize the polio virus has been assembled in
a strand of synthetic DNA (Cello et al., 2002).

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.6 The emergence of primitive cells

Ribosome
mRNA

99

Amino acids
ATP

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Fig. 5.3. Translation in a microenvironment. In the upper ﬁgure, amino acids and
ATP encapsulated in the vesicle volume are used to make small amounts of GFP and
alpha hemolysin (a-HL). The membrane prevents access to external amino acids
and ATP, so the system will quickly exhaust the ‘nutrients’ trapped in the vesicle.
However, because the a-HL is a pore forming protein, it migrates to the membrane
and assembles into a heptamer with a pore large enough to allow amino acids
and ATP to pass into the vesicle (lower ﬁgure). The system can now synthesize
signiﬁcant amounts of new protein, and the vesicle begins to show ﬂuorescence
from the accumulation of GFP (Noireaux and Libchaber, 2004).

This thought experiment clearly points out the limitations of our current
understanding of the origin of cellular life. It does make clear that life could not
begin as a complex molecular system of a hundred or more genes required to
fabricate the simplest possible artiﬁcial cell that uses DNA, RNA, and ribosomes
for self-reproduction. Instead, as noted earlier, there must have been a kind of
molecular scaffold that was much simpler, yet had the capacity to evolve into the
living systems we observe today. Is there any hope that we might discover such a
system? One possible lead is to ﬁnd a ribozyme that can grow by polymerization,
in which the ribozyme copies a sequence of bases in its own structure (Johnston
et al., 2001). So far, the polymerization has only copied a string of 14 nucleotides,
but this is a good start. If a ribozyme system can be found that catalyses its own
complete synthesis using genetic information encoded in its structure, it could
rightly be claimed to have the essential properties that are lacking so far in artiﬁcial
cell models: reproduction of the catalyst itself. Instead of the hundred or so genes
necessary for the translation system described above, the number is reduced to just a
few genes that allow the ribozyme to control its own replication, synthesize catalysts

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

100

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

related to primitive metabolism, including synthesis of membrane components,
and perhaps a pore-forming molecule that allows nutrient transport. Given such
a ribozyme, it is not difﬁcult to imagine its incorporation into a system of lipid
vesicles that would have the basic properties of the living state.

5.7 Self-assembly processes in prebiotic organic mixtures

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

We can now return to considering process that are likely to have occurred on the
prebiotic Earth, ultimately leading to the beginning of life and initiating Darwinian
evolution. We will ﬁrst ask what physical properties are required if a molecule is
to become incorporated into a stable cellular compartment. As discussed earlier,
all membrane-forming molecules are amphiphiles, with a hydrophilic ‘head’ and a
hydrophobic ‘tail’ on the same molecule. If amphiphilic molecules were present in
the mixture of organic compounds available on the early Earth, it is not difﬁcult to
imagine that their self-assembly into molecular aggregates was a common process.
Is this a plausible premise? In order to approach this question, we can assume
that the mixture of organic compounds in carbonaceous meteorites such as the
Murchison meteorite resembles components available on the early Earth through
extraterrestrial infall. A series of organic acids represents the most abundant watersoluble fraction in carbonaceous meteorites (Cronin et al., 1988). Samples of the
Murchison meteorite have been extracted in an organic solvent commonly used to
extract membrane lipids from biological sources (Deamer and Pashley, 1989). When
this material was allowed to interact with aqueous phases, one class of compounds
with acidic properties was clearly capable of forming membrane-bounded vesicles
(Figure 5.4).

A

B

Fig. 5.4. Membranous compartments are produced by self-assembly of
amphiphilic molecules extracted from the Murchison meteorite. The larger vesicles
have a diameter of 2030 µm. The image on the right shows a ﬂuorescent dye (1 mM
pyranine) encapsulated within the vesicular volume. The fact that anionic dye
molecules can be trapped shows that the vesicles are bounded by true membranes
representing a permeability barrier. Bars show 20 µm.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.8 Emergence of membrane functions

101

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Fig. 5.5. Membranous compartments composed of very simple amphiphiles are
capable of encapsulating macromolecules in stable vesicles. In the image above,
DNA molecules have been trapped in decanoic acid vesicles. The DNA is stained
with acridine orange so that it can be visualized by ﬂuorescence microscopy. Bar
shows 20 µm.

From these results, it is reasonable to conclude that a variety of simpler
amphiphilic molecules were present on the early Earth that could participate in
the formation of primitive membrane structures. Even if membranous vesicles
were commonplace on the early Earth and had sufﬁcient permeability to permit
nutrient transport to occur, these structures would be virtually impermeable to larger
polymeric molecules that were necessarily incorporated into molecular systems
on the pathway to cellular life. The encapsulation of macromolecules in lipid
vesicles has been demonstrated by hydration–dehydration cycles that simulate
an evaporating lagoon (Shew and Deamer, 1985). Molecules as large as DNA
can be captured by such processes. For instance, when a dispersion of DNA and
fatty acid vesicles is dried, the vesicles fuse to form a multilamellar sandwich
structure with DNA trapped between the layers. Upon rehydration, vesicles reform
that contain highly concentrated DNA, a process that can be visualized by staining
with a ﬂuorescent dye (Figure 5.5).

5.8 Emergence of membrane functions
Membranes have many functions in addition to acting as a container for the
macromolecular polymers of life. Three primary membrane functions associated
with a protocell would include selective inward transport of nutrients from the

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

102

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

environment, capture of the energy available in light or oxidation–reduction
potentials, and coupling of that energy to some form of energy currency such as
ATP in order to drive polymer synthesis.
The simplest of these functions is that of a permeability barrier which limits free
diffusion of solutes between the cytoplasm and external environment. Although
such barriers are essential for cellular life to exist, there must also be a mechanism
by which selective permeation allows speciﬁc solutes to cross the membrane. In
contemporary cells, such processes are carried out by transmembrane proteins that
act as channels and transporters. Examples include the proteins that facilitate the
transport of glucose and amino acids into the cell, channels that allow potassium and
sodium ions to permeate the membrane, and active transport of ions by enzymes
that use ATP as an energy source. It seems unlikely that the ﬁrst living cellular
systems evolved such highly specialized membrane transport systems, which
brings up the question of how early cells overcame the membrane permeability
barrier. One possibility is that simple diffusion across the bilayer may have been
sufﬁcient. To give a perspective on permeability and transport rates by diffusion,
we can compare the ﬂuxes of relatively permeable and relatively impermeable
solutes across contemporary lipid bilayers. The measured permeability of lipid
bilayers to small, uncharged molecules such as water, oxygen, and carbon dioxide
is greater than the permeability to ions by a factor of ∼109 . Such values mean
little by themselves, but make more sense when put in the context of time
required for exchange across a bilayer: half the water in a liposome exchanges
in milliseconds, while potassium ions have half-times of exchange measured
in days.
We can now consider some typical nutrient solutes like amino acids and
phosphates. Such molecules are ionized, which means that they would not
readily cross the permeability barrier of a lipid bilayer. Permeability coefﬁcients
of liposome membranes to phosphate, amino acids, and nucleotides have been
determined (Chakrabarti and Deamer, 1994; Monnard et al., 2002) and were found
to be similar to ionic solutes such as sodium and chloride ions. From these ﬁgures
one can estimate that if a primitive microorganism depended on passive transport
of phosphate across a lipid bilayer composed of a typical phospholipid, it would
require several years to accumulate phosphate sufﬁcient to double its DNA content,
or pass through one cell cycle. In contrast, a modern bacterial cell can reproduce
in as short a time as 20 minutes.
If solutes like amino acids and phosphate are so impermeant, how could primitive
cells have had access to these essential nutrients? One clue may be that modern
lipids are highly evolved products of several billion years of evolution, and typically
contain hydrocarbon chains 16–18 carbons in length. These chains provide an
interior ‘oily’ portion of the lipid bilayer that represents a nearly impermeable

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.9 Emergence of growth processes in primitive cells

103

barrier to the free diffusion of ions such as sodium and potassium. The reason
is related to the common observation that ‘oil and water don’t mix’. Using
more technical language, ion permeation of the hydrophobic portion of a lipid
bilayer faces a very high energy barrier which is associated with the difference
in energy for an ion in water to ‘dissolve’ in the oily interior of a lipid bilayer
composed of hydrocarbon chains. However, studies have shown that permeability
is strongly dependent on chain length (Paula et al., 1996). For instance, shortening
phospholipid chains from 18 to 14 carbons increases permeability to ions by nearly
three orders of magnitude. The reason is that thinner membranes have increasing
numbers of transient defects that open and close on nanosecond timescales, so
that ionic solutes can pass from one side of the membrane to the other without
dissolving in the oily interior phase of the bilayer. Ionic solutes even as large as
ATP can diffuse across a bilayer composed of a 14-carbon phospholipid (Monnard
and Deamer, 2001). On the early Earth, shorter hydrocarbon chains would have
been much more common than longer chain amphiphiles, suggesting that the
ﬁrst cell membranes were sufﬁciently leaky so that ionic and polar nutrients
could enter, while still maintaining larger polymeric molecules in the encapsulated
volume.
There are several implications of this conjecture. First, if a living cell is to take
up nutrients by diffusion rather than active transport, the nutrients must be at a
reasonably high concentration, perhaps in the millimolar range. It is doubtful that
such high concentrations would be available in the bulk phase medium of a lake
or sea, which suggests that early life needed to be in an environment such as a
small pond undergoing periodic wet–dry cycles that would concentrate possible
nutrients. On the other hand, that same cell also was likely to have metabolic waste
products, so it could not be in a closed system or it would soon reach thermodynamic
equilibrium in which the waste product accumulation inhibits forward reactions
required for metabolism and synthesis. And ﬁnally, a leaky membrane may allow
entry of nutrients, but it would also be useless for developing the ion gradients that
are essential energy sources for all modern cells. All of these considerations should
guide our thinking as we attempt to deduce conditions that would be conducive for
the origin of cellular life.
5.9 Emergence of growth processes in primitive cells
Reports (Walde et al., 1994) showed that vesicles composed of oleic acid can
grow and ‘reproduce’ as oleoyl anhydride spontaneously hydrolyzed in the reaction
mixture, thereby adding additional amphiphilic components (oleic acid) to the
vesicle membranes. This approach has been extended by Hanczyc et al. (2003), who
prepared myristoleic acid membranes under deﬁned conditions of pH, temperature,

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

104

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

GROWTH

FILTRATION

GROWTH

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Fig. 5.6. Growth and division of lipid vesicles. (See text for details.)

and ionic strength. The process by which the vesicles formed from micellar solutions
required several hours, apparently with a rate limiting step related to the assembly
of ‘nuclei’ of bilayer structures. However, if a mineral surface in the form of clay
particles was present, the surface in some way catalysed vesicle formation, reducing
the time required from hours to a few minutes. The clay particles were spontaneously
encapsulated in the vesicles. The authors further found that RNA bound to the clay
was encapsulated as well. In a second series of experiments, Hanczyc and coworkers
(Hanczyc et al., 2003; Hanczyc and Szostak, 2004) showed that the myristoleic
acid vesicles could be induced to grow by addition of fatty acid to the medium,
presumably by incorporating fatty acid molecules into the membrane, rather than
by fusion of vesicles. If the resulting suspension of large vesicles was then ﬁltered
through a polycarbonate ﬁlter having pores 0.2 µm in diameter, the larger vesicles
underwent a kind of shear-induced division to produce smaller vesicles which could
undergo further growth cycles (Figure 5.6). This remarkable series of experiments
clearly demonstrated the relative simplicity by which complex system of lipid,
genetic material and mineral catalysts can produce a model protocellular structure
that can undergo a form of growth and division.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

5.10 Environmental constraints on the ﬁrst forms of life

105

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

5.10 Environmental constraints on the ﬁrst forms of life
Although self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules promotes the formation
of complex molecular systems, the physical and chemical properties of an
aqueous phase can signiﬁcantly inhibit such processes, possibly constraining the
environments in which cellular life ﬁrst appeared. One such constraint is that
temperature strongly inﬂuences the stability of vesicle membranes. It has been
proposed that the last common ancestor, and even the ﬁrst forms of life, were
hyperthermophiles that developed in geothermal regions such as hydrothermal
vents (Baross et al., 1983) or deep subterranean hot aquifers (Pace, 1991). Such
environments have the advantage of providing chemical energy in the form of
redox potentials as well as abundant mineral surfaces to act as potential catalysts
and adsorbants. However, because the intermolecular forces that stabilize selfassembled molecular systems are relatively weak, it is difﬁcult to imagine how
lipid bilayer membranes assembling from plausible prebiotic constituents would be
stable under these conditions. All hyperthermophiles today have highly specialized
lipid components, and it seems likely that these are the result of more recent
adaptation than a molecular fossil of early life.
A second concern is related to the ionic composition of a marine environment.
The high salt concentration of the present ocean has the potential to exert signiﬁcant
osmotic pressure on any closed membrane system. All marine organisms today have
highly evolved membrane transport systems that allow them to maintain osmotic
equilibrium against substantial salt gradients across their membranes. Furthermore,
the concentrations of divalent cations, in particular Mg2+ and Ca2+ , were likely to
exceed 10 mM in the early oceans, similar to their concentrations in seawater today.
In the absence of oxygen, Fe2+ would also be present at millimolar concentrations,
rather than the micromolar levels in contemporary seawater. At concentrations
in the millimolar range, all such divalent cations have a strong tendency to bind
to the anionic head groups of amphiphilic molecules. This causes aggregation
and precipitation, strongly inhibiting the formation of stable membranes
(Monnard et al., 2002).
These considerations suggest that, from the perspective of membrane biophysics,
the most plausible planetary environment for the origin of life would be at moderate
temperature ranges (< 60 ◦ C), and the ionic content would correspond to low
ionic strength and pH values near neutrality (pH 5–8) with divalent cations at
submillimolar concentrations. This suggestion is in marked contrast to the view
that life most likely began in a marine environment, perhaps even the extreme
environment of a hydrothermal vent. One argument favouring a marine site for life’s
beginning is that fresh water would be rare on the early Earth. Even with today’s
extensive continental crust, fresh water only represents ∼1% of the contemporary

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

106

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

Earth’s reservoir of liquid water. Another concern about a fresh water origin of
life is that the lifetime of fresh water bodies tends to be short on a geological time
scale. On the other hand, if sea water, with its high content of sodium chloride
and divalent ions, markedly inhibits self-assembly processes and reactions that are
essential to the emergence of cellular life, we may need to reconsider the assumption
that life inevitably began in a marine environment. A more plausible site for the
origin of cellular life may be a low ionic strength lacustrine environment such as
a pond or lake. After the ﬁrst form of cellular life was able to establish itself in a
relatively benign environment, it would rapidly begin to adapt through Darwinian
selection to more rigorous environments, including the extreme temperatures,
salt concentrations and pH ranges that we associate with the limits of life on
the Earth.
Acknowledgements
Portions of this chapter were adapted from a previous review (Deamer et al., 2002).

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

References
Anders, E. (1989). Pre-biotic organic matter from comets and asteroids. Nature, 342,
255–257.
Apel, C. L., Deamer, D. W., and Mautner, M. (2002). Self-assembled vesicles of
monocarboxylic acids and alcohols: conditions for stability and for the encapsulation
of biopolymers. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1559, 1–10.
Bangham, A. D., Standish, M. M., and Watkins, J. C. (1965). Diffusion of univalent ions
across the lamellae of swollen phospholids. J. Mol. Biol., 13, 238–252.
Baross, J. A., and Hoffman, S. E. (1983). Submarine hydrothermal vents and associated
gradient environments as sites for the origin and evolution of life. Origins of Life, 15,
327–335.
Bernstein, M. P., Sandford, S. A., Allamandola, L. J., Chang, S., and Scharberg, M. A.
(1995). Organic compounds produced by photolysis of realistic interstellar and
cometary ice analogs containing methanol. Astrophys. J., 454, 327–344.
Bernstein, M. P., Dworkin, J. P., Sandford, S. A., and Allamandola, L. J. (2001).
Ultraviolet irradiation of naphthalene in H2O ice: Implications for meteorites and
biogenesis. Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 36, 351.
Bernstein, M. P., Dworkin, J. P., Sandford, S. A., Cooper, G. W., and Allamandola, L. J.
(2002). The formation of racemic amino acids by ultraviolet photolysis of interstellar
ice analogs. Nature, 416, 401–403.
Cello, J., Paul, A. V., and Wimmer, E. (2002). Chemical synthesis of poliovirus cDNA:
generation of infectious virus in the absence of natural template. Science, 297,
1016–1018.
Chakrabarti, A., and Deamer, D. W. (1994). Permeation of membranes by the neutral from
fo amino acids and peptides: relevance to the origin of peptide translocation. J. Mol.
Evol., 39, 1–5.
Chakrabarti, A., Joyce, G. F., Breaker, R. R., and Deamer, D. W. (1994). RNA synthesis by
a liposome-encapsulated polymerase. J. Mol. Evol., 39, 555–559.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

References

107

Chyba, C. F., and Sagan, C. (1992). Endogenous production, exogenous delivery and
impact-shock synthesis of organic molecules: An inventory for the origin of life.
Nature, 355, 125–130.
Cronin J. R., Pizzarello S., and Cruikshank, D. P. (1988). In Meteorites and the Early
Solar System, eds. J. F. Kerridge and M. S. Matthews. Tuscon: University of Arizona
Press, p. 819.
Deamer, D. W., and Barchfeld, G. L. (1982). Encapsulation of macromolecules by lipid
vesicles under simulated prebiotic conditions. J. Mol. Evol., 18, 203–206.
Deamer, D. W., and Oro, J. (1980). Role of lipids in prebiotic structures. Biosystems, 12,
167–175.
Deamer, D. W., and Pashley, R. M. (1989). Amphiphilic components of carbonaceous
meteorites. Origins Life Evol. B., 19, 21–33.
Deamer, D. W, Dworkin, J. P., Sandford, S. A., Bernstein, M. P., and Allamandola, L. J.
(2002). The ﬁrst cell membranes. Astrobiology, 2, 371–382.
Delsemme, A. (1984). The cometary connection with prebiotic chemistry. Origins of Life,
14, 51–60.
Dworkin, J. P., Deamer, D. W., Sandford, S. A., and Allamandola, L. J. (2001).
Self-assembling amphiphilic molecules: synthesis in simulated
interstellar/precometary ices. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 815–819.
Dyson, F. (1999). The Origins of Life. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ehrenfreund, P., and Charnley, S. B. (2000). Organic molecules in the interstellar medium,
comets, and meteorites: A voyage from dark clouds to the early Earth. Annu. Rev.
Astron. Astr., 38, 427–483.
Ehrenfreund, P., d’Hendecourt, L., Charnley, S. B., and Ruiterkamp, R. (2001). Energetic
and thermal processing of interstellar ices. J. Geophys. Res., 106,
33291–33302.
Gerakines, P. A., Moore, M. H., and Hudson, R. L. (2000). Energetic processing of
laboratory ice analogs: UV photolysis versus ion bombardment. J. Geophys. Res.,
106, 3338.
Greenberg, M., and Mendoza-Gomez, C. X. (1993). Interstellar dust evolution: a reservoir
of prebiotic molecules, in The Chemistry of Life’s Origins, ed. M. Greenberg, C. X.
Mendoza-Gomez and V. Pironella. Dordrecht: Academic Press, p. 1.
Hanczyc, M. M., and Szostak, J. W. (2004). Replicating vesicles as models of primitive
cell growth and division. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 28, 660–664.
Hanczyc M. M., Fujikawa S. M., and Szostak, J.W. (2003). Experimental models of
primitive cellular compartments: encapsulation, growth, and division. Science, 302,
618–622.
Holland, H. D. (1984). The Chemical Evolution of the Atmosphere and Oceans. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hoang, L., Fredrick, K., and Noller H. F. (2004). Creating ribosomes with an all-RNA 30S
subunit P site. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 101, 12439–12443.
Hutchison, C., Peterson, S., Gill, S., et al. (1999). Global transposon mutagenesis and a
minimal Mycoplasma genome. Science, 286, 2165–2169.
Ishikawa, K., Sato, K., Shima, Y., Urabe, I., and Yomo, T. (2004). Expression of a
cascading genetic network within liposomes. FEBS Letters, 576, 387.
Johnston, W. K., Unrau, P. J., Lawrence, M. S., Glasner, M. E., and Bartel, D. L. (2001).
RNA-catalyzed RNA polymerization: accurate and general RNA-templated primer
extension. Science, 292, 1319–1325.
Kasting J. F. and Brown L. L. (1998). In The Molecular Origins of Life, ed. A. Brack.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 35.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

108

Emergent phenomena in biology: the origin of cellular life

Kauffman, S. (1993). The Origin of Order. Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Knauth, L. P. (2005). Temperature and salinity history of the Precambran ocean:
implications for the course of microbial evolution. Palaeogeogr. Palaeocl., 219,
53–69.
Kvenvolden, K. A., Lawless, J. G., Pering, K., et al. (1970). Evidence for extraterrestrial
amino-acids and hydrocarbons in the Murchison meteorite. Nature, 228, 923.
Lawless, J. G., and Yuen, G. U. (1979). Quantitation of monocarboxylic acids in the
Murchison carbonaceous meteorite. Nature, 282, 396–398.
Love, S. G., and Brownlee, D. E. (1993). A direct measurement of the terrestrial mass
accretion rate of cosmic dust. Science, 262, 550–553.
Luisi, P. L. (1998). About various deﬁnitions of life. Origins Life Evol. B., 28, 613–622.
Maurette M. (1998). In The Molecular Origins of Life, ed. A. Brack. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, p. 147.
McCollom, T. M., Ritter, G., and Simoneit, B. R. T. (1999). Lipid synthesis under
hydrothermal conditions by Fischer-Tropsch-type reactions. Origins of Life Evol. B.,
29, 153–166.
Miller, S. L. (1953). Production of amino acids under possible primitive Earth conditions.
Science, 117, 528–529.
Miller, S. L., and Urey, H. C. (1959). Organic compound synthesis on the primitive Earth.
Science, 130, 245–251.
Monnard, P.-A., and Deamer, D. W. (2001). Loading of DMPC based liposomes with
nucleotide triphosphates by passive diffusion: A plausible model for nutrient uptake
by the protocell. Origins Life Evol. B., 31, 147–155.
Monnard, P.-A., and Deamer, D. W. (2006). Models of primitive cellular life: polymerases
and templates in liposomes. Philos. T. Roy. Soc. B.
Monnard, P.-A., Apel, C. L., Kanavarioti, A. and Deamer, D. W. (2002). Inﬂuence of ionic
solutes on self-assembly and polymerization processes related to early forms of life:
Implications for a prebiotic aqueous medium. Astrobiology, 2, 139–152.
Morowitz, H. J. (1992). Beginnings of Cellular Life. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Morowitz, H. J., Heinz, B., and Deamer, D. W. (1988). The chemical logic of a minimum
protocell. Origins Life Evol. B., 18, 281–7.
Munoz-Caro, G. M., Meierhenrich, U. J., Schutte, W. A. et al. (2002). Amino acids from
ultraviolet irradiation of interstellar ice analogues. Nature, 416, 403–406.
Noireaux, V., and Libchaber, A. (2004). A vesicle bioreactor as a step toward an artiﬁcial
cell assembly. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 2, 139–152., 17669–17674.
Nomura, S., Tsumoto, K., Hamada, T., et al. (2003). Gene expression within cell-sized
lipid vesicles. Chembiochem, 4, 1172–1175.
Oesterhelt, D. and Stoeckenius, W. (1973). Functions of a new photoreceptor membrane.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 70, 2853–2857.
Oró, J. (1961). Comets and the formation of biochemical compounds on the primitive
Earth. Nature, 190, 389–390.
Pace, N. R. (1991). Origin of life – facing up to the physical setting. Cell, 65, 531.
Paula, S, Volkov, A. G., Van Hoek, A. N., Haines, T.H., and Deamer, D.W. (1996).
Permeation of protons, potassium ions, and small polar molecules through
phospholipid bilayers as a function of membrane thickness. Biophys. J.,
70, 339.
Racker, E., and Stoeckenius W. (1974). Reconstitution of purple membrane vesicles
catalyzing light-driven proton uptake and adenosine triphosphate formation. J. Biol.
Chem., 249, 662–663.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

References

109

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.

Rasmussen, S., Chen, L., Deamer, D., et al. (2004). Evolution. Transitions from nonliving
to living matter. Science, 303, 963–966.
Rushdi, A. I. and B. Simoneit. (2001). Lipid formation by aqueous Fischer–Tropsch type
synthesis over a temperature range of 100 to 400 ◦ C. Origins Life Evol. B., 31,
103–118.
Sandford, S. A. (1996). The inventory of interstellar materials available for the formation
of the Solar System. Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 31, 449–476.
Sandford, S. A., Bernstein, M. P., and Dworkin, J. P. (2001). Assessment of the interstellar
processes leading to deuterium enrichment in meteoritic organics. Meteorit. Planet.
Sci., 36, 1117–1133.
Shew, R., and Deamer, D. W. (1985). A novel method for encapsulation of
macromolecules in liposomes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 816, 1–8.
Singer, S. J., and Nicolson, G. L. (1972). The ﬂuid mosaic model. Science, 175, 720–727.
Szostak, J. W., Bartel, D. P., and Luisi, P. L. (2001). Synthesizing life. Nature, 409,
387–390.
Wachtershäuser, G. (1988). Before enzymes and templates: Theory of surface metabolism.
Microbiol. Rev., 52, 452–484.
Walde, P., Wick, R., Fresta, M., Mangone, A., and Luisi, P. L. (1994). Autopoietic
self-reproduction of fatty acid vesicles. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 116, 11649.
Walde, P., Goto, A., Monnard, P.-A., Wessicken, M., and Luisi, P.-A. (1994). Oparin’s
reactions revisited: enzymatic synthesis of poly(adenylic acid) in micelles and
self-reproducing vesicles. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 116, 7541–7547.
Yu, W., Sato, K., Wakabayashi, M., et al. (2001). Synthesis of functional protein in
liposome. J. Biosci. Bioeng., 92, 590.

Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

Copyright © 2007. Cambridge University Press. All rights reserved.
Planetary Systems and the Origins of Life, Cambridge University Press, 2007. ProQuest Ebook Central,
http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=321462.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:08:27.

