CHAPTER	4

Prebiotic	Earth:
First	Organic	Compounds	and	First
Informational	Molecules
	
Where	the	hell	do	the	likes	of	us	come	from,	Hans	Thomas?	Have	you
thought	about	that?
—JOSTEIN	GAARDER,	The	Solitaire	Mystery	(1996)

	
s	we	saw	in	chapter	2,	Earth’s	atmosphere	4	billion	years	ago	was
very	different	from	the	one	we	know	today.	There	was	no	oxygen,
but	 other	 gases	 were	 present.	 In	 one	 scenario,	 these	 were
methane	 (CH4),	 water	 vapor	 (H2O),	 nitrogen	 (N2),	 ammonia	 (NH3),	 hydrogen	 sulfide
(H2S),	 and	 carbon	 dioxide	 (CO2).	 Primeval	 hydrogen	 (H2)	 and	 helium	 (He)	 were
disappearing	fast	because	Earth’s	gravity	was	not	strong	enough	to	keep	them	in	the
atmosphere.	 Traces	 of	 helium	 would	 always	 be	 present,	 however,	 thanks	 to	 the
radioactive	 decay	 of	 elements,	 such	 as	 uranium,	 thorium,	 and	 radium,	 in	 Earth’s
interior.	 There	 were	 also	 oceans,	 whose	 geography	 we	 would	 not	 recognize	 today,
since	 plate	 tectonics	 has	 moved	 the	 continents	 around.	 Volcanic	 activity	 contributed
water,	nitrogen,	carbon	dioxide,	sulfur	dioxide,	and	other	gases	to	the	atmosphere.
The	 sight	 must	 have	 been	 awesome:	 the	 sky	 was	 red	 and	 the	 Sun	 looked	 bluish
because	 nitrogen,	 which	 scatters	 blue	 light,	 was	 not	 yet	 the	 dominant	 gas	 in	 the
atmosphere.	 The	 atmospheric	 pressure	 was	 ten	 times	 higher	 than	 it	 is	 today.	 There
was	 of	 course	 no	 life	 but	 there	 was	 movement;	 the	 wind	 blew	 clouds	 and	 volcanic
smoke	around	while	the	waves	lapped	at	beaches	made	of	solid	rock,	not	yet	sand.
High	 tides	 took	 place	 every	 three	 hours	 and	 the	 Moon	 appeared	 four	 times	 closer
than	 today.	 The	 temperature	 was	 much	 higher	 than	 now,	 perhaps	 as	 high	 as	 90°C,
because	 of	 the	 greenhouse	 effect	 caused	 by	 atmospheric	 methane	 and	 carbon

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

A

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

dioxide.	 Nevertheless,	 this	 temperature	 was	 low	 enough	 for	 liquid	 water	 to	 exist.	 In
the	absence	of	oxygen,	there	was	no	ozone	(O3)	layer	and	Earth	was	bombarded	by
hard	ultraviolet	(UV)	radiation	from	the	Sun.
Scientists	 have	 gained	 much	 information	 concerning	 Earth’s	 primitive	 atmosphere
by	 studying	 our	 sister	 planet,	 Venus,	 whose	 atmosphere	 contains	 huge	 amounts	 of
carbon	 dioxide	 (96	 percent),	 some	 nitrogen	 (3	 percent),	 and	 some	 sulfur	 dioxide
(SO2),	 but	 no	 oxygen.	 However,	 being	 closer	 to	 the	 Sun,	 Venus	 receives	 twice	 as
much	 radiation	 and	 heat,	 which,	 combined	 with	 the	 enormous	 greenhouse	 effect
caused	by	the	vast	amount	of	CO2,	raises	the	surface	temperature	to	460°C.	This	is
where	the	parallels	between	Venus	and	Earth	stop:	liquid	water	cannot	exist	on	Venus
because	 it	 is	 too	 hot,	 so	 life	 is	 impossible	 on	 that	 planet.	 Mars	 has	 the	 opposite
problem:	being	farther	from	the	Sun,	it	is	too	cold	for	liquid	water	to	exist.	However,
its	present	tenuous	atmosphere	is	very	much	like	Venus’s,	without	the	sulfur	dioxide.
Conceivably,	Venus	and	Earth	originally	had	similar	atmospheres,	composed	of,	in
order	of	decreasing	abundance,	H2,	He,	CH4,	H2O,	N2,	NH3,	and	H2S.	What	happened
to	 these	 gases	 on	 these	 planets?	 Today,	 Earth’s	 atmosphere	 is	 composed	 of	 about
79	 percent	 nitrogen,	 21	 percent	 oxygen,	 and	 low	 amounts	 of	 a	 few	 other	 gases.
Venus	 also	 lost	 many	 of	 its	 original	 gases.	 As	 we	 have	 seen,	 H2	 and	 He	 quickly
escaped	 into	 space.	 The	 fate	 of	 the	 other	 gases	 (except	 N2)	 was	 sealed	 by	 the	 UV
radiation	 from	 the	 Sun,	 which	 decomposed	 them	 through	 the	 phenomenon	 known	 as
photolysis.	 On	 Venus,	 where	 liquid	 water	 did	 not	 exist,	 water	 vapor	 was	 quickly
decomposed	into	hydrogen	(which	escaped)	and	free	oxygen,	which	rapidly	oxidized
CH4	and	H2S	to	CO2	and	SO2.	The	oxidation	of	NH3	simply	produced	more	N2.
On	 Earth,	 where	 liquid	 water	 did	 exist,	 H2O	 photolysis	 was	 not	 nearly	 as
pronounced	because	UV-induced	water	decomposition	occurs	best	in	the	gas	phase.
Nevertheless,	 photolysis	 of	 the	 primeval	 gases	 did	 take	 place,	 albeit	 more	 slowly,
because	 Earth	 is	 farther	 from	 the	 Sun.	 Thus	 CH4,	 NH3,	 and	 H2S	 also	 gradually
disappeared.	 There	 was	 one	 enormous	 difference	 between	 Earth	 and	 Venus,
however:	 thanks	 to	 the	 presence	 of	 liquid	 water,	 the	 CO2	 and	 SO2	 generated	 by
photolysis	 dissolved	 in	 the	 oceans,	 reacted	 with	 the	 minerals	 present	 there,	 and
became	locked	in	rocks.	This	prevented	the	runaway	greenhouse	effect	that	occurred
on	Venus	and	made	nitrogen	the	dominant	gas.	After	a	few	hundred	million	years,	the
sky	finally	turned	blue.	Before	this	happened—that	is,	while	Earth’s	atmosphere	was
still	 reducing	 (still	 containing	 appreciable	 amounts	 of	 H2,	 CH4,	 and	 NH3)—could	 it	 be
that	 some	 of	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 life	 were	 somehow	 assembled	 in	 the	 primeval
gases?	After	all,	Earth’s	crust	and	the	oceans	at	that	time	could	not	have	held	much
in	 terms	 of	 carbon-	 and	 nitrogen-containing	 compounds	 that	 make	 up	 living	 cells.
Some	scientists	do	indeed	think	that	the	first	building	blocks	of	life	were	synthesized
via	atmospheric	chemistry.

ORGANIC	COMPOUNDS	FROM	EARTH’S	PUTATIVE
Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

PRIMITIVE	ATMOSPHERE

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

In	 1953,	 Stanley	 Miller,	 working	 in	 the	 laboratory	 of	 Harold	 Urey	 (the
Nobel	laureate	who	discovered	deuterium)	at	the	University	of	Chicago,	published	the
results	 of	 a	 strange	 experiment	 that	 was	 based	 on	 the	 assumption	 that	 Earth’s
atmosphere	 was	 once	 a	 reducing	 one.	 In	 a	 reducing	 atmosphere,	 free	 oxygen	 does
not	 exist,	 and	 elements	 are	 present	 in	 a	 reduced,	 hydrogenated	 form	 such	 as	 CH4,
H2O,	and	NH3,	and,	of	course,	H2.	Miller	knew	that	the	Russian	Alexander	Oparin	and
the	 British	 J.	 B.	 S.	 Haldane	 had	 suggested	 several	 decades	 earlier	 that	 a	 reducing
atmosphere	 could	 have	 allowed	 the	 synthesis	 of	 organic	 compounds	 (composed	 of
carbon,	 hydrogen,	 nitrogen,	 and	 a	 few	 other	 elements)	 necessary	 for	 life	 to	 appear.
However,	 they	 never	 did	 any	 experiments	 to	 test	 that	 idea.	 Miller,	 then	 a	 graduate
student,	 decided	 to	 test	 this	 hypothesis,	 apparently	 with	 only	 reluctant	 support	 from
his	boss,	Urey	(who	did	not	coauthor	the	article).
Miller	built	an	apparatus	(figure	4.1),	made	of	glass,	into	which	he	introduced	liquid
water,	 hydrogen,	 methane,	 and	 ammonia	 gases.	 (The	 air	 had	 previously	 been
pumped	out	of	the	system	to	eliminate	oxygen.)	To	produce	water	vapor,	Miller	boiled
water	 held	 in	 a	 flask;	 this	 had	 the	 further	 effect	 of	 circulating	 the	 mixture	 of	 gases
present	 in	 the	 apparatus.	 To	 simulate	 rain,	 Miller	 added	 a	 cooled	 condenser	 to	 the
system	and	trapped	the	condensed	water	in	a	U-shaped	tube.	The	condensed	water
thus	represented	the	primitive	ocean.	Samples	from	this	tube	could	be	harvested	and
analyzed	 for	 any	 water-soluble	 molecules	 that	 formed.	 Finally,	 the	 apparatus
contained	another	large	glass	flask,	in	which	the	gases	circulated,	and	which	housed
two	metal	electrodes	that	allowed	electrical	sparking	of	the	gas	mixture.	The	electric
discharge	 simulated	 the	 lightning	 that	 undoubtedly	 must	 have	 occurred	 in	 the
atmosphere	 (the	 atmosphere	 of	 Jupiter	 is	 witness	 to	 huge	 lightning	 discharges	 and
contains	all	the	gases	used	by	Miller).

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	 4.1	 Schematic	 representation	 of	 the	 equipment	 used	 by	 Stanley	 Miller	 to	 produce	 organic
molecules	under	abiotic	conditions.	The	air	from	the	glass	apparatus	is	first	evacuated	by	pumping.	Water	and	the
gases	hydrogen,	methane,	and	ammonia	are	then	added	to	the	flask	at	the	lower	left.	Water	is	brought	to	a	boil	and
water	vapor	starts	circulating	(black	dots)	in	the	apparatus.	Water	vapor	and	the	three	other	gases	then	fill	the	large
glass	 chamber	 at	 upper	 right.	 The	 chamber	 is	 equipped	 with	 two	 electrodes	 connected	 to	 a	 power	 source,	 and
sparking	is	initiated.	Water	vapor	and	compounds	resulting	from	the	action	of	sparking	are	then	condensed	by	the
cooling	system	and	accumulate	in	the	trap.	Compounds	harvested	from	the	trap	are	then	analyzed	chemically.

After	 several	 days	 of	 cycling	 the	 gases	 and	 sparking,	 Miller	 noticed	 that	 the
condensed	 water	 in	 the	 tube	 had	 turned	 pink	 and	 subsequently	 orange-red.	 Clearly,
some	 chemistry	 was	 taking	 place,	 as	 the	 original	 gases	 were	 completely	 colorless.
Analysis	 of	 the	 solution	 revealed	 the	 presence	 of	 amino	 acids,	 the	 building	 blocks	 of
proteins!	 Of	 the	 twenty	 amino	 acids	 found	 in	 proteins,	 ten	 were	 formed	 in	 Miller’s
experiments.	The	chemistry	that	took	place	in	these	experiments	is	now	understood.
For	 example,	 the	 simple	 amino	 acid	 glycine	 results	 from	 the	 condensation	 of

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

formaldehyde	(formed	from	the	sparked	gases)	with	ammonia	and	hydrogen	cyanide
(also	 formed	 in	 the	 gas	 mixture)	 to	 produce	 the	 compound	 aminonitrile.	 Aminonitrile
then	reacts	with	water	to	form	glycine	(figure	4.2).
In	addition	to	amino	acids	that	make	up	proteins,	gas-discharge	experiments	have
also	yielded	the	four	nitrogenous	bases,	adenine	(A),	cytosine	(C),	guanine	(G),	and
uracil	 (U),	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 RNA.	 Adenine	 for	 example,	 results	 from	 the
condensation	 of	 five	 molecules	 of	 hydrogen	 cyanide	 (figure	 4.3).	 (It	 is	 unsettling	 to
think	 that	 the	 poison	 used	 to	 execute	 prisoners	 in	 a	 gas	 chamber	 can	 lead	 to	 the
synthesis	 of	 some	 of	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 life!)	 Finally,	 many	 types	 of	 sugars	 were
also	 synthesized	 in	 these	 experiments,	 including	 ribose,	 the	 sugar	 found	 in	 RNA.
These	sugars	are	made	through	polymerization	of	formaldehyde,	itself	formed	in	the
sparked	gases.	However,	ribose	is	made	in	small	amounts,	and	it	is	unclear	how	it,	as
opposed	 to	 all	 other	 sugars,	 came	 to	 form	 RNA.	 We	 will	 see	 a	 possible	 answer	 to
this	problem	later	in	the	chapter.
The	 startling	 results	 of	 Miller’s	 experiments	 have	 led	 to	 the	 notion	 that	 Earth’s
primitive	 oceans	 accumulated	 more	 and	 more	 of	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 life,	 amino
acids,	 nitrogenous	 bases,	 and	 sugars,	 and	 became	 some	 sort	 of	 primordial	 or
prebiotic	 soup.	 (Instead	 of	 the	 term	 soup,	 which	 suggests	 a	 chunky	 mixture—think
about	 split	 pea	 with	 ham	 or	 chicken	 noodle	 soup!—I	 prefer	 the	 word	 broth.)
Primordial	broths	of	the	Miller	type	have	been	replicated	by	many	investigators	using
similar	 gas	 mixtures	 exposed	 to	 short-wave	 UV	 light	 or	 silent	 electric	 discharge,	 all
undoubtedly	present	on	primitive	Earth.
Interestingly,	 free	 oxygen	 completely	 interfered	 with	 all	 the	 reactions	 just
described.	Since	we	know	that	the	oldest	rocks	found	on	Earth	are	not	oxidized,	this
supports	 the	 conclusion	 that,	 indeed,	 oxygen	 was	 not	 present	 in	 the	 primeval
atmosphere	 and	 could	 not	 have	 blocked	 the	 chemical	 reactions	 observed	 by	 Miller
and	others.	Thus	the	problem	seemed	solved:	the	building	blocks	of	proteins	and	RNA
(but	 not	 DNA,	 as	 thymine	 was	 not	 formed	 in	 these	 reactions)	 were	 made	 in	 Earth’s
reducing	atmosphere.1	But	was	the	problem	really	solved?	Perhaps	not.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	4.2	The	two-step	synthesis	of	glycine	from	formaldehyde,	ammonia,	and	hydrogen	cyanide	in

sparked	gases.

There	 are	 indeed	 difficulties	 with	 Miller’s	 experiments.	 First,	 most	 scientists	 now
concur	 that	 Earth’s	 atmosphere	 did	 not	 contain	 significant	 amounts	 of	 hydrogen,
methane,	 and	 ammonia	 for	 the	 length	 of	 time	 sufficient	 to	 allow	 the	 formation	 of	 a
primordial	 broth	 based	 on	 these	 compounds.	 For	 these	 dissenters,	 the	 atmosphere
quickly	 evolved	 into	 one	 containing	 mostly	 carbon	 dioxide	 and	 nitrogen	 (plus	 water

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

vapor	and	unreactive	gases	such	as	argon	and	neon),	much	like	the	atmospheres	of
Venus	and	Mars	today.	Indeed,	it	is	argued	that	Earth’s	primeval	atmosphere	(as	well
as	those	of	Venus	and	Mars)	was	blown	off	as	our	Sun	ignited.	Another	contributing
factor	 would	 have	 been	 the	 violent	 collision	 between	 young	 Earth	 and	 a	 Mars-sized
object	 that	 became	 the	 Moon.	 A	 new	 atmosphere	 could	 then	 have	 been	 generated
through	 volcanic	 activity.	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 volcanoes	 emit	 mostly	 water	 vapor,	 carbon
dioxide,	and	nitrogen,	together	with	small	amounts	of	carbon	monoxide	and	hydrogen.
No	 ammonia	 and	 methane	 are	 emitted	 by	 modern	 volcanoes.	 Therefore	 Earth’s
primitive	atmosphere	may	have	been	much	less	reducing	than	imagined	by	Miller.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	4.3	The	synthesis	of	adenine	from	the	condensation	of	six	hydrogen	cyanide	molecules.

Furthermore,	 sparking	 mixtures	 of	 nitrogen,	 water,	 carbon	 dioxide,	 or	 carbon
monoxide	 “à	 la	 Miller”	 gives	 somewhat	 disappointing	 results,	 albeit	 not	 entirely
negative	 ones.	 Without	 hydrogen,	 CO2	 and	 N2	 cannot	 produce	 HCN,	 necessary	 for
the	formation	of	amino	acids	and	nitrogenous	bases.	If,	however,	mixtures	of	CO2,	N2,
and	 H2	 or	 mixtures	 of	 CO,	 N2,	 and	 H2	 are	 sparked,	 some	 amino	 acids,	 in	 reduced

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

numbers	and	yields,	are	produced.	Thus	a	strongly	reducing	atmosphere	is	necessary
to	 produce	 the	 whole	 variety	 and	 large	 amounts	 of	 organic	 compounds	 found	 in	 a
Miller-type	 of	 experiment.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 the	 nucleic	 acid	 base	 uracil	 could	 be
produced	 by	 sparking	 mixtures	 of	 methane	 and	 nitrogen.	 Where	 was	 this	 methane
coming	 from	 if	 it	 did	 not	 exist	 in	 the	 primeval	 atmosphere?	 It	 could	 have	 come	 from
hydrothermal	vents	found	on	the	bottom	of	the	ocean	or	it	could	have	been	delivered
by	cometary	impacts	(see	later).	HCN,	so	crucial	as	an	intermediate	in	the	synthesis
of	 amino	 acids	 and	 bases,	 could	 have	 originated	 from	 the	 reaction	 of	 methane	 with
nitrogen	to	produce	it	and	hydrogen.	This	reaction	could	have	been	catalyzed	by	UV
light	 from	 the	 Sun.	 Hydrogen	 produced	 by	 this	 reaction,	 plus	 hydrogen	 emitted	 by
volcanoes,	 would	 have	 made	 Earth’s	 atmosphere	 mildly	 reducing.	 In	 conclusion,	 the
atmosphere	 was	 probably	 not	 as	 reducing	 as	 Miller	 thought,	 but	 reduced	 carbon	 in
the	form	of	CH4	as	well	as	H2	gas	were	probably	present	in	modest	amounts.
It	 was	 discovered	 in	 the	 early	 1960s	 that	 simple	 mixtures	 of	 ammonia	 and
hydrogen	cyanide	in	water	also	form	amino	acids	and	large	amounts	of	adenine.	This
suggested	 that	 bringing	 these	 three	 chemicals	 together	 somewhere,	 and	 not
necessarily	on	Earth,	could	produce	some	of	the	building	blocks	of	life.	At	about	the
same	time,	amino	acids,	as	well	as	the	bases	adenine	and	guanine,	were	detected	in
meteorites.1	 Meteorites	 derive	 mostly	 from	 asteroids	 present	 between	 the	 orbits	 of
Mars	 and	 Jupiter	 (some	 rare	 ones	 are	 of	 lunar	 or	 Martian	 origin).	 These	 meteorites
were	 never	 exposed	 to	 any	 kind	 of	 atmosphere,	 reducing	 or	 oxidizing.	 How	 then	 do
they	 contain	 organic	 compounds?	 These	 compounds	 would	 have	 had	 to	 have	 been
made	 in	 space,	 possibly	 as	 a	 result	 of	 reactions	 between	 water,	 hydrogen	 cyanide,
methane,	and	ammonia.	Do	these	chemicals	actually	exist	in	space?	Yes,	they	do.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

SPACE	CHEMISTRY	AND	THE	ORIGINS	OF	LIFE
We	saw	in	chapter	2	that,	indeed,	large	interstellar	clouds	in	which	stars
and	 planets	 are	 formed	 do	 contain	 these	 molecules,	 plus	 many	 others.	 Water	 ice	 is
thought	 to	 be	 the	 most	 common	 solid	 in	 the	 universe,	 and	 even	 methanol	 (CH3OH;
wood	 alcohol)	 and	 ethanol	 (C2H5OH;	 drinking	 alcohol)	 exist	 in	 deep	 space!	 What	 is
more,	these	clouds	also	contain	cyanoacetylene	(HC3N),	 a	 chemical	 that	 reacts	 with
hydrogen	cyanide	to	form	nitrogenous	bases	found	in	RNA.	Thus	gases	and	particles
left	 over	 from	 the	 protoplanetary	 disc	 after	 its	 condensation	 into	 planets	 could	 have
delivered	 significant	 amounts	 of	 organic	 materials	 to	 Earth’s	 surface	 in	 the	 form	 of
meteorites	and	comets.
Comets	 in	 particular	 are	 thought	 to	 be	 aggregates	 of	 primordial	 material	 much
predating	 the	 formation	 of	 the	 solar	 system	 as	 we	 know	 it	 today.	 They	 are	 found	 in
two	 systems	 orbiting	 the	 Sun.	 The	 first	 system	 is	 called	 the	 Kuyper	 belt	 and	 its
members	orbit	the	Sun	between	the	orbits	of	Neptune	and	Pluto.	The	second	system,
called	 the	 Oort	 cloud,	 forms	 a	 halo,	 well	 beyond	 the	 orbit	 of	 Pluto,	 around	 the	 solar
system.	Once	in	a	while,	a	comet	is	knocked	off	its	orbit	because	of	the	gravitational

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

effect	of	the	planets	or	a	passing	star.	The	comet	then	has	a	chance	to	approach	the
Sun	 at	 a	 much	 closer	 distance,	 with	 the	 result	 that	 some	 of	 its	 material	 evaporates
and	forms	a	visible	tail.	The	tail	can	be	studied	and	its	spectrum	recorded,	either	from
Earth	 or	 from	 spacecraft	 on	 a	 rendezvous	 mission.	 Results	 of	 all	 studies	 agree	 that
comets	 are	 rich	 in	 organic	 material	 and	 water.	 Comet	 Halley	 was	 even	 shown	 to
contain	 the	 bases	 found	 in	 RNA	 and	 DNA.	 Comets	 visible	 from	 Earth	 are	 not	 that
frequent	today,	but	they	may	have	been	much	more	prevalent	in	the	vicinity	of	Earth	a
few	billion	years	ago	when	the	solar	system	was	forming.	Collisions	with	young	Earth
may	 have	 been	 frequent	 and	 would	 have	 resulted	 in	 the	 seeding	 of	 the	 planet	 with
building	blocks	of	life	or	their	precursors.
Similarly,	 meteorites,	 some	 of	 which	 contain	 organic	 compounds,	 as	 we	 have
seen,	 still	 collide	 with	 Earth	 today	 and	 may	 have	 played	 the	 same	 role.	 It	 is	 known
that	 planet	 Earth	 accumulates	 about	 100	 tons	 per	 day	 of	 meteoritic	 material	 in	 the
form	of	micrometeorites.	These	micrometeorites	measure	about	0.1	mm	in	diameter
and	are	carbon	rich	(up	to	7	percent	by	weight).	Micrometeorite	samples	have	been
collected	in	the	“clean”	environment	of	antarctic	ice	and	have	been	shown	to	contain
detectable	 amounts	 of	 organic	 molecules.	 It	 is	 quite	 possible	 that	 prebiotic	 Earth
accumulated	 vast	 amounts	 of	 carbon-containing	 compounds	 by	 sweeping	 up
micrometeoritic	material.
If	comets	and	meteorites	and	their	cohort	of	organic	molecules	truly	originate	from
primeval	 interstellar	 clouds	 (at	 a	 further	 stage	 of	 processing	 in	 the	 case	 of
meteorites),	 these	 clouds	 should	 also	 contain	 molecules	 found	 in	 comets	 and
meteorites.	Astronomical	observations	have	shown	that	this	is	the	case.	These	clouds
contain,	in	addition	to	gases,	solid	material	in	the	form	of	dust.	Their	spectra	indicate
that	this	dust	is	made	of	microscopic	silicate	granules	covered	with	ice	composed	of
water,	 methanol,	 methane,	 carbon	 monoxide,	 carbon	 dioxide,	 and	 a	 class	 of	 organic
molecules	called	 polycyclic	aromatic	 hydrocarbons.	Given	 that	interstellar	 clouds	are
constantly	 bathed	 in	 UV	 light	 emitted	 by	 nearby	 stars,	 the	 potential	 for	 interstellar
chemistry	is	great.
Interstellar	 ice	 analogues	 have	 been	 created	 in	 the	 laboratory:	 the	 compounds
known	to	exist	in	interstellar	clouds	were	sprayed	in	a	vacuum	chamber	kept	at	very
low	 temperature	 to	 simulate	 conditions	 found	 in	 space.	 The	 ice	 grains	 thus	 formed
were	illuminated	with	UV	light	to	mimic	starlight.	Analysis	of	these	ices	revealed	that
complex	 organic	 molecules	 could	 be	 formed,	 including	 quinones	 (electron	 transfer
intermediates	 in	 photosynthesis),	 amino	 acids,	 and	 long-chain	 hydrocarbons	 with
properties	 similar	 to	 amphiphilic	 lipids	 found	 in	 the	 membranes	 of	 living	 cells	 (see
chapter	 3).	 These	 amphiphilic	 hydrocarbons	 are	 able	 to	 form	 microscopic	 vesicles,
presumably	 through	 bilayer	 formation,	 when	 dispersed	 in	 water.	 Intriguingly,	 similar
compounds	are	found	in	some	meteorites	and	they,	too,	form	these	vesicles	in	water.
Such	vesicles	are	able	to	trap	a	variety	of	chemicals,	and	by	keeping	these	chemicals
in	 close	 contact,	 they	 may	 have	 initiated	 some	 of	 the	 chemical	 reactions	 that	 led	 to
life.	Interestingly,	amphiphilic	hydrocarbons	are	not	formed	in	Miller-type	experiments.
In	 conclusion,	 space	 contains	 a	 host	 of	 organic	 molecules	 able	 to	 generate,	 through

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

chemical	 reactions,	 some	 compounds	 necessary	 for	 life	 to	 appear.	 Furthermore,
space	 chemistry	 seems	 able	 to	 produce	 molecules	 not	 found	 in	 gases	 submitted	 to
electric	discharges.
Another	objection	to	Miller’s	experiments	is	based	on	the	chirality	of	the	molecules
he	 produced	 in	 his	 sparked	 gases.	 Chirality,	 also	 called	 handedness,	 refers	 to	 the
three-dimensional	arrangement	of	atoms	in	a	molecule.	A	good	analogy	is	that	of	the
symmetry	of	human	hands,	hence	the	word	handedness.	The	left	hand	and	the	right
hand	are	directly	superimposable	when	pressed	palm	to	palm.	They	are	not	perfectly
superimposable	 when	 pressed	 palm	 to	 knuckles.	 To	 achieve	 palm-to-palm	 contact,
one	of	our	hands	must	be	rotated,	or	a	single	hand	can	be	directly	superimposed	with
its	 mirror	 image.	 The	 same	 thing	 happens	 in	 nature:	 amino	 acids	 come	 in	 two
varieties,	 left-handed	 and	 right-handed,	 which	 can	 be	 distinguished	 by	 their	 ability	 to
rotate	 polarized	 light	 either	 to	 the	 left	 or	 to	 the	 right.	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 amino	 acids	 in
living	 cells	 belong	 to	 the	 left-handed	 category.	 One	 of	 the	 criticisms	 of	 Miller-type
experiments	 is	 that	 they	 produce	 equal	 amounts	 of	 left-handed	 and	 right-handed
amino	acids,	something	not	found	in	living	systems.	In	contrast,	amino	acids	found	in
meteorites	contain	slightly	more	left-handed	amino	acids	than	right-handed	ones.	This
does	 not	 prove	 that	 life	 originated	 from	 meteorites,	 but	 it	 certainly	 does	 not	 rule	 out
this	notion.
Thus	 space	 itself,	 not	 necessarily	 Earth	 and	 its	 primitive	 atmosphere,	 may	 have
been	responsible	for	the	synthesis	of	the	building	blocks	of	life.	Or	was	it?

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

OCEAN	FLOOR	CHEMISTRY
As	we	saw	in	the	introduction	to	this	book,	science	constantly	questions
and	 requestions	 received	 knowledge.	 That	 some	 scientists	 think	 that	 organic
compounds	 important	 for	 life	 were	 formed	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 or	 were	 brought	 to
Earth	by	comets	and	meteorites	does	not	make	it	so.	Other	hypotheses	can	always
be	formulated.	A	third	hypothesis,	which	holds	that	the	first	organic	compounds	were
made	 on	 Earth	 rather	 than	 in	 space	 or	 in	 the	 atmosphere,	 is	 the	 hydrothermal	 vents
hypothesis.
Earth’s	crust	is	particularly	thin	at	the	level	of	ocean	floors.	There,	tectonic	plates
slowly	 slide	 on	 top	 of	 the	 magma	 and	 by	 doing	 so,	 create	 ridges	 and	 cracks	 in	 the
crust.	Water	percolates	through	these	cracks,	becomes	superheated	by	contact	with
the	 magma,	 and	 dissolves	 many	 of	 the	 minerals	 present	 there.	 The	 pressure	 is	 so
high	that	the	water,	heated	to	several	hundred	degrees,	does	not	boil	but	is	spewed
back	 through	 chimney-like	 structures	 called	 hydrothermal	 vents	 (figure	 4.4).	 These
vents	are	often	surrounded	by	miniature	ecosystems,	where	many	types	of	bacteria,
worms,	and	crabs	proliferate.
Now,	high	pressure	and	temperature	can	create	some	interesting	chemistry.	Could
it	 be	 that	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 life	 were	 once	 synthesized	 from	 purely	 inorganic
compounds	 in	 or	 near	 hydrothermal	 vents?	 Theoretical	 studies	 performed	 in	 the	 mid

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

1990s	 indicated	 that,	 yes,	 this	 is	 possible.	 The	 branch	 of	 chemistry	 called
thermodynamics	 mathematically	 determines	 what	 chemical	 reactions	 are	 possible	 or
impossible.	 Using	 this	 approach,	 scientists	 realized	 that	 in	 water,	 the	 synthesis	 of	 all
amino	 acids	 and	 their	 linking	 to	 form	 small	 proteins	 was	 theoretically	 possible	 above
100°C	 and	 under	 high	 pressure.	 The	 ingredients	 needed	 to	 achieve	 this	 synthesis
were	 CO2,	 ammonia	 salts,	 and	 H2S	 (some	 amino	 acids	 contain	 sulfur).	 It	 turns	 out
that	 both	 high	 temperature	 and	 these	 particular	 chemicals	 are	 found	 in	 oceanic
hydrothermal	 vents.	 Therefore	 in	 theory,	 amino	 acids	 and	 proteins	 could	 have	 been
formed	 at	 great	 depth	 under	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 ocean.	 Of	 course,	 such	 calculations
did	 not	 prove	 that	 these	 reactions	 actually	 took	 place;	 some	 scientists	 used	 the
derogatory	 term	 paper	 chemistry	 to	 characterize	 these	 studies.	 The	 hydrothermal
vent	hypothesis	had	to	be	put	to	the	test.
This	 was	 done	 using	 an	 instrument	 called	 a	 bomb,	 which	 is	 simply	 a	 reinforced
container	 able	 to	 sustain	 high	 temperatures	 and	 pressures.	 It	 was	 shown	 that,
indeed,	a	whole	catalog	of	organic	molecules,	including	amino	acids	and	pyruvic	acid
(an	 important	 metabolite	 ubiquitous	 in	 living	 cells),	 could	 be	 formed	 at	 high	 pressure
and	 temperature	 from	 H2S,	 CO,	 and	 CO2	 as	 well	 as	 ammonia	 (from	 nitrate)	 and
nitrogenated	hydrocarbons.	Interestingly,	iron	sulfide	(FeS)	was	absolutely	necessary
to	 catalyze	 these	 reactions,	 to	 generate	 hydrogen	 for	 reduction	 reactions,	 and	 to
concentrate	and	stabilize	the	reaction	products.	This	mineral	is	abundant	in	the	earth’s
crust	in	the	form	of	pyrrhotite.	Although	the	formation	of	nitrogenous	bases	as	found
in	 RNA	 and	 DNA	 has	 not	 been	 reported,	 hydrothermal	 vent	 chemistry	 seems	 to	 be
much	more	than	just	paper	chemistry.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	4.4	An	oceanic	hydrothermal	vent.	(Courtesy	of	the	National	Oceanographic	and	Atmospheric
Administration	via	the	Smithsonian	Institution.)

In	summary,	no	one	of	the	three	hypotheses	aimed	at	explaining	the	origin	of	the
building	 blocks	 of	 life	 is	 complete.	 Experiments	 “à	 la	 Miller”	 have	 not	 yielded	 longchain	 amphiphilic	 hydrocarbons	 like	 those	 found	 in	 cells,	 but	 amino	 acids	 and
nitrogenous	 bases	 were	 produced.	 Space-based	 chemistry	 can	 produce	 the	 three
types	 of	 compounds,	 but	 critics	 argue	 that	 organic	 molecules	 ferried	 by	 comets	 and

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

meteorites	colliding	with	Earth	could	not	have	survived	atmospheric	entry	and	impact
because	 of	 the	 high	 heat	 generated.	 Finally,	 high	 temperature-high	 pressure
chemistry,	 as	 is	 presumably	 taking	 place	 in	 hydrothermal	 vents,	 has	 so	 far	 not
produced	 nitrogenous	 bases	 and	 long-chain	 lipids.	 How	 can	 this	 conundrum	 be
solved?
It	is	always	possible	that	more	research	on	the	preceding	three	systems	will	yield
some	new	findings	and	solve	the	mystery.	On	the	other	hand,	it	is	also	possible	that
life	did	not	need	amino	acids,	nitrogenous	bases,	and	long-chain	lipids	all	at	the	same
time.	 One	 can	 imagine,	 for	 instance,	 a	 situation	 in	 which	 genetic	 information	 (in	 the
form	of	bases	linked	together	to	form	a	nucleic	acid)	came	first,	and	that	this	genetic
information	started	coding	for	some	form	of	primitive	metabolism.	Or	perhaps	another
scenario	 occurred,	 in	 which	 mineral	 catalysts	 or	 primitive	 enzymes,	 made	 of	 amino
acids	 synthesized	 in	 hydrothermal	 vents	 or	 elsewhere,	 started	 a	 “protometabolism”
that	eventually	led	to	the	formation	of	nucleic	acids.	In	that	case,	genetic	information
would	have	appeared	as	a	result	of	a	mineral-based	protometabolism	and,	possibly,
after	 the	 products	 it	 now	 codes	 for,	 proteins.	 Yet	 another	 possibility	 is	 that	 life
appeared	 as	 a	 result	 of	 a	 complicated	 cooperation	 between	 simple	 proteins	 and
simple	nucleic	acids.	Scientists	have	not	yet	developed	this	third	scenario.	Therefore
we	 will	 consider	 the	 “metabolism-first”	 world	 and	 the	 “RNA-first”	 world	 in	 that	 order,
keeping	in	mind	that	these	two	models	are	not	necessarily	incompatible.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

PROTEINS	AND	METABOLISM	FIRST:	THE	IRON-SULFUR
WORLD
Two	of	the	most	prominent	proponents	of	the	idea	that	protometabolism
was	 key	 to	 the	 appearance	 of	 life	 on	 Earth	 are	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 winner	 Christian	 de
Duve	 of	 Belgium	 and	 Günter	 Wächtershäuser	 of	 Germany.	 Some	 of	 their	 work	 is
discussed	 later.	 Both	 espouse	 the	 view	 that	 iron-	 and	 sulfur-containing	 compounds
were	 critical	 to	 the	 establishment	 of	 protometabolism	 in	 the	 prebiotic	 world	 (a	 world
still	 devoid	 of	 life	 as	 we	 know	 it	 but	 poised	 to	 see	 its	 birth).	 Such	 a	 view	 hinges	 on
two	 ideas:	 first,	 a	 source	 of	 energy	 was	 needed	 to	 make	 possible	 some	 prebiotic
chemical	 reactions,	 and	 second,	 the	 formation	 of	 proteins	 may	 have	 happened
spontaneously.
As	 we	 saw	 in	 chapter	 3,	 a	 great	 number	 of	 chemical	 reactions	 taking	 place	 in
living	 cells	 require	 an	 energy	 supply	 in	 the	 form	 of	 ATP,	 a	 combination	 of	 adenine,
ribose,	 and	 three	 phosphate	 groups.	 Before	 life	 existed,	 there	 was	 no	 abundant
source	 of	 ATP.	 What	 could	 possibly	 have	 been	 the	 source	 of	 energy	 that	 drove
prebiotic	 reactions	 in	 the	 primeval	 broth?	 In	 addition,	 assuming	 that	 the	 primitive
Earth’s	 atmosphere	 was	 not	 as	 reducing	 as	 thought	 by	 others,	 but	 that	 it	 contained
carbon,	mostly	in	the	form	of	CO	or	CO2	(but	not	CH4),	and	no	longer	any	hydrogen,
how	could	hydrogenated	(reduced)	forms	of	carbon	be	produced?	It	is	indeed	mostly
reduced	 carbon	 that	 is	 present	 in	 biological	 molecules.	 A	 possible	 answer	 lies	 in	 a

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

combination	 of	 the	 effects	 of	 UV	 light	 from	 the	 Sun	 and	 the	 presence	 of	 iron	 on
Earth’s	 surface.	 This	 is	 how	 things	 may	 have	 worked	 according	 to	 de	 Duve.	 Not
surprisingly,	his	model	is	based	on	oxidation-reduction	reactions.
Iron,	 in	 the	 form	 of	 oxides	 and	 salts,	 is	 a	 very	 common	 element	 on	 Earth.	 When
chemically	combined	with	other	elements,	iron	becomes	ionized	(electrically	charged)
and	its	ions	can	either	be	doubly	positively	charged	(Fe2+)	or	triply	positively	charged
(Fe3+).	Fe2+	is	the	reduced	form	of	iron,	whereas	Fe3+	is	its	oxidized	form.	Both	forms
currently	 exist	 naturally	 on	 Earth	 and	 must	 have	 existed	 in	 the	 distant	 past	 as	 well.
Reduced	iron	is	soluble	in	water,	whereas	oxidized	iron	combined	with	oxygen	is	not.
Thus	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 oxygen,	 prebiotic	 Earth’s	 waters	 must	 have	 contained
significant	 amounts	 of	 reduced	 iron	 dissolved	 in	 water.	 Furthermore,	 water	 (H2O)
always	 contains	 a	 certain	 amount	 of	 protons	 (H+)	 and	 hydroxyl	 radicals	 (OH').
Remembering	 that	 oxidation-reduction	 reactions	 are	 accompanied	 by	 electron
transfer	(see	chapter	3),	it	is	easy	to	understand	how	the	oxidation	of	iron	may	have
powered	some	important	chemical	reactions	on	prebiotic	Earth.
It	turns	out	that	under	the	influence	of	UV	light	(provided	by	the	Sun),	the	Fe2+	ions
can	 react	 with	 the	 protons	 present	 in	 water	 to	 form	 Fe3+	 ions	 and	 hydrogen	 gas.	 In
this	 reaction,	 reduced	 Fe2+	 donates	 an	 electron	 to	 each	 proton	 (H+)	 to	 give	 Fe3+	 (an
additional	positive	charge	is	gained	because	an	electron	is	lost)	and	an	H	atom.	Two
H	 atoms	 quickly	 combine	 to	 give	 hydrogen	 gas,	 H2,	 which	 escapes	 into	 the
atmosphere.	The	Fe3+	so	generated	then	reacts	with	water	to	give	iron	oxide,	which
precipitates	 out	 of	 solution	 as	 a	 black	 material.	 Thus	 iron	 is	 oxidized	 in	 this	 process
while	 protons	 are	 reduced	 to	 hydrogen	 gas	 (figure	 4.5).	 This	 hydrogen	 may	 have
rendered	the	atmosphere	more	reducing.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	4.5	How	the	oxidation	of	iron	ions	in	water	irradiated	by	ultraviolet	(UV)	light	produces	hydrogen
gas	that	escapes	into	the	atmosphere.	In	this	process,	reduced	iron	Fe2+	is	oxidized	into	Fe3+,	which	reacts	with
water	to	produce	insoluble	magnetite.	The	electrons	lost	by	Fe2+	in	the	oxidation	reaction	are	captured	by	H+	ions,
always	present	in	water,	to	give	neutral	hydrogen	atoms	that	quickly	combine	to	make	molecular	hydrogen	gas,	H2.
(Adapted	from	de	Duve,	C.	1991.	Blueprint	for	a	Cell.	Burlington,	N.C.:	Neil	Patterson.)

Furthermore,	 and	 again	 under	 the	 influence	 of	 UV	 light,	 iron	 ions	 could	 possibly
have	 cycled	 back	 and	 forth	 between	 a	 reduced	 and	 an	 oxidized	 state	 while	 reacting
with	 CO2.	 Carbon	 dioxide,	 a	 gas,	 is	 soluble	 in	 water.	 Therefore	 dissolved	 Fe2+	 ions
could	have	donated	electrons	to	CO2,	which,	in	the	presence	of	H+,	would	have	been
reduced	to	CH4	(methane)	or	══CH2	compounds	free	to	react	with	other	substances.
In	 addition,	 some	 of	 the	 newly	 formed	 ══CH2	 compounds	 could	 have	 spontaneously
reacted	with	Fe3+	 ions	 (before	 they	 precipitated)	 to	 regenerate	 Fe2+.	 The	 interesting
thing	here	is	that	this	last	reaction	releases	energy	that	could	have	been	used	to	drive

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

other	reactions.	This	mechanism	is	called	the	iron	cycle	(figure	4.6).
Thus	 iron	 chemistry	 allows	 for	 the	 formation	 of	 reduced	 carbon	 compounds,
including	 methane,	 hydrogen,	 and	 possibly	 other	 reduced	 chemicals	 such	 as
ammonia,	 hydrogen	 cyanide,	 and	 hydrogen	 sulfide.	 It	 also	 produces	 energy	 in	 the
absence	 of	 ATP.	 This	 scenario	 shows	 that	 a	 native	 and	 strongly	 reducing	 primitive
atmosphere	 may	 not	 have	 been	 needed;	 the	 iron	 cycle	 produced	 the	 necessary
reduced	 ingredients	 in	 solution	 and	 these	 could	 have	 combined	 to	 form	 amino	 acids
and	 nitrogenous	 bases	 to	 make	 up	 the	 prebiotic	 broth.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 if	 the
primitive	 atmosphere	 was	 reducing,	 the	 iron	 cycle	 could	 have	 provided	 energy	 to
achieve	reactions	involving	precursor	compounds	made	in	the	atmosphere.	Therefore
the	 iron	 cycle	 and	 the	 formation	 of	 organic	 molecules	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 may	 have
been	synergistic.
Let	us	now	examine	how	the	iron	cycle	and	its	energy	production	could	have	been
taken	 over	 by	 reactions	 that	 approximate	 living	 mechanisms	 (which	 the	 iron	 cycle
does	not).	We	saw	in	chapter	3	that	the	universal	energy	donor	in	living	cells	is	ATP.
Remember	 that	 it	 is	 the	 cleavage	 of	 one	 or	 two	 phosphate	 groups	 from	 ATP	 that
generates	 energy	 usable	 by	 other	 reactions.	 Could	 the	 prebiotic	 broth	 have	 stored
energy	in	compounds	containing	phosphorus	but	no	adenine	and	no	ribose	(assuming
these	 two	 were	 either	 absent	 or	 present	 in	 very	 low	 concentrations)?	 Yes,	 and	 the
following	reactions	explain	how.
We	must	first	assume	that	a	class	of	molecules	called	carboxylic	acids	existed	in
the	prebiotic	broth.	These	organic	acids	have	the	general	formula	R—COOH,	where
R	 is	 a	 group	 that	 may	 be	 simply	 a	 hydrogen	 atom,	 or	 it	 may	 be	 a	 methyl	 group	 (—
CH3)	 or	 a	 more	 complicated	 group	 of	 atoms.2	 It	 turns	 out	 that	 carboxylic	 acids	 are
made	 abundantly	 in	 a	 sparked	 mixture	 of	 methane,	 water,	 hydrogen,	 and	 ammonia.
They	 are	 also	 found,	 along	 with	 amino	 acids,	 in	 some	 meteorites.	 Then	 we	 must
assume	 that	 another	 class	 of	 molecules,	 called	 thiols,	 also	 existed	 in	 the	 prebiotic
broth.	Thiol	derives	from	the	Greek	word	for	sulfur,	and	the	general	formula	of	a	thiol
is	R′—SH,	where	R′	can	be	H	(in	which	case	the	thiol	is	simply	H2S,	hydrogen	sulfide)
or	a	group	containing	reduced	carbon,	such	as	—CH3,	to	make	methyl	thiol.	We	have
seen	 that	 H2S	 was	 probably	 originally	 present	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 prebiotic	 Earth
and	if	not,	it	was	produced	by	hydrothermal	vents.	It	is	also	soluble	in	water.	It	could
thus	have	easily	reacted	in	solution,	under	the	action	of	UV	light,	with	reduced	carbon
formed	 from	 carbon	 dioxide	 through	 the	 iron	 cycle,	 to	 produce	 a	 variety	 of	 organic
thiols.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

FIGURE	4.6	The	iron	cycle.	As	Fe2+	is	being	oxidized	into	Fe3+,	CO2	dissolved	in	water	is	reduced	into

—CH2	compounds	(hydrocarbons)	that	can	be	used	as	organic	building	blocks.	The	reoxidation	of	some	of	these
══CH2	compounds	into	CO2,	coupled	with	the	reduction	of	Fe3+	back	to	Fe2+,	produces	energy	that	can	be	used	to
drive	other	prebiotic	reactions.	The	cycle	is	catalyzed	by	UV	light.	(Adapted	from	de	Duve,	C.	1991.	Blueprint	for	a
Cell.	Burlington,	N.C.:	Neil	Patterson.)

Next,	 the	 carboxylic	 acids	 could	 have	 reacted	 with	 the	 thiols	 to	 form	 a	 class	 of
compounds	named	thioesters:

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

R—COOH	+	R′—SH	→	R′—S~CO—R	+	H2O
The	 ~	 sign	 in	 the	 thioester	 formula	 represents	 an	 energy-rich	 chemical	 bond.	 The
energy	necessary	to	form	that	thioester	bond	could	have	come	from	the	iron	cycle,	or
else	 this	 reaction	 could	 have	 occurred	 spontaneously	 at	 high	 temperature	 and	 high
acidity	(perhaps	as	in	hydrothermal	vents?).	Finally,	we	must	assume	that	phosphate
(H2PO4−)	 was	 present.	 Thus	 thioesters	 could	 have	 reacted	 with	 phosphate	 in	 the
following	way:
R′—S~CO—R	+	H2PO4−	→	R′—SH	+	R—CO—O~P—HO3
and
R—CO—O~P—HO3−	+	H2PO4−	→	R—COOH	+	H2P2O72−,
where	 H2P2O72−	 is	 pyrophosphate.	 Pyrophosphate,	 like	 ATP,	 is	 an	 energy-rich,
phosphate-containing	molecule,	and	it	could	have	played	a	role	in	protometabolism	in
the	 absence	 of	 adenine	 and	 ribose.	 What	 is	 also	 remarkable	 about	 this	 set	 of
reactions	 is	 that	 the	 carboxylic	 acid	 (R—COOH)	 and	 the	 thiol	 (R′—SH)	 are
regenerated	 and	 can	 thus	 enter	 a	 new	 cycle	 of	 energy-rich	 pyrophosphate
production.	 Taken	 together,	 the	 iron	 cycle	 and	 thioesters	 provide	 an	 interesting
scenario	for	energy	transactions	in	the	prebiotic	broth.	The	author	of	this	scenario,	de

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

Duve,	 has	 called	 it	 the	 “iron-thioester	 world.”	 Needless	 to	 say,	 not	 everyone	 agrees
with	 this	 scheme;	 particularly	 uncomfortable	 with	 it	 are	 those	 who	 think	 that
protometabolism	is	a	consequence	of	the	appearance	of	genetic	information,	not	the
other	way	around.
Nevertheless,	 the	 iron-sulfur	 world	 has	 more	 to	 offer.	 Having	 tackled	 the	 energy
problem,	proponents	of	this	view	also	think	that	protein	enzymes	may	have	appeared
without	 genetic	 information.	 We	 saw	 in	 chapter	 3	 that	 proteins	 are	 made	 by	 the
chemical	 linking	 of	 amino	 acids.	 This	 linking	 does	 not	 occur	 spontaneously	 and	 is
performed	in	cells,	as	we	have	seen,	through	the	mechanism	of	translation,	involving
not	 only	 the	 amino	 acids	 but	 also	 ribosomes	 and	 transfer	 RNAs.	 Assuming	 that
ribosomes	and	transfer	RNAs	did	not	exist	in	the	iron-sulfur	world,	how	could	proteins
have	formed?	Again,	thioesters	come	to	the	rescue.
As	 their	 name	 indicates,	 amino	 acids	 are	 acids.	 Not	 only	 that,	 they	 are	 also
carboxylic	 acids	 containing	 the	 —COOH	 group	 that	 we	 encountered	 before.	 Thus
amino	 acids	 could	 have	 reacted	 with	 thiols	 (R′—SH)	 to	 form	 thioesters,	 too.
Furthermore,	 it	 has	 been	 demonstrated	 that	 amino	 acid	 thioesters	 can	 polymerize
(make	 long	 chains	 of	 linked	 amino	 acids)	 spontaneously,	 without	 ribosomes	 and
tRNAs!	 Therefore	 the	 prebiotic	 broth	 may	 have	 contained	 a	 large,	 random	 set	 of
different	 proteins,	 all	 potentially	 composed	 of	 many	 different	 amino	 acid	 sequences.
And	these	proteins,	much	like	today’s	proteins	made	by	living	organisms,	could	have
possessed	 enzymatic	 activity.	 These	 “protoenzymes”	 could	 have	 progressively
synthesized	 the	 building	 blocks	 of	 nucleic	 acids	 (the	 nitrogenous	 bases),	 and	 they
even	 could	 have	 diversified	 the	 pool	 of	 amino	 acids	 to	 form	 other	 types	 of
protoenzymes.	 These	 many	 types	 of	 protoenzymes	 could	 then	 have	 been	 able	 to
catalyze	 the	 synthesis	 of	 RNA	 or	 DNA—that	 is,	 genes.	 At	 this	 point,	 the	 prebiotic
broth	would	have	become	informational.
There	 are,	 of	 course,	 problems	 with	 this	 view.	 For	 example,	 we	 do	 not	 know
whether	random	chains	formed	from	amino	acid	thioesters	have	any	kind	of	significant
and	 relevant	 enzymatic	 activity.	 This	 must	 be	 tested	 in	 the	 laboratory.	 Then	 it	 is
unclear	 whether	 these	 putative	 protoenzymes	 (with	 an	 assumed	 catalytic	 activity)
would	have	been	able	to	coordinate	their	activities	to	produce	any	significant	amount
of	 genetic	 material,	 RNA	 or	 DNA.	 Thus	 the	 iron-sulfur	 world	 is	 an	 interesting,
falsifiable	hypothesis	that	must	be	buttressed	by	a	considerable	amount	of	lab	work.
Nevertheless,	this	theory	is	attractive	because	it	does	provide	a	possible	path	to	RNA
or	DNA.
The	 Wächtershäuser	 model	 for	 the	 origin	 of	 protometabolism	 also	 relies	 on	 iron
and	 sulfur	 chemistry.	 This	 scientist	 (who	 is	 also	 a	 patent	 lawyer)	 does	 away
altogether	 with	 the	 notion	 of	 primordial	 broth.	 For	 him,	 Earth	 did	 not	 need	 a	 helping
hand	from	space,	lightning,	or	a	reducing	atmosphere;	all	necessary	ingredients	were
present	 from	 the	 beginning	 in	 volcanoes	 and	 hydrothermal	 vents.	 He	 considers	 that
only	CO2,	CO,	H2S	(present	today	in	volcanic	emissions	and	hydrothermal	vents),	and
FeS	(common	in	Earth’s	crust)	were	needed	to	get	protometabolism	started.
This	 is	 how	 it	 would	 have	 worked.	 First,	 as	 in	 the	 de	 Duve	 model,	 a	 source	 of

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

energy	and	electrons	(to	achieve	reduction	reactions)	is	necessary.	This	source	could
have	been	the	reaction	between	iron	sulfide	and	hydrogen	sulfide:
FeS	+	H2S	→	FeS2	+	2	e−	+	2	H+,
where	FeS2	is	pyrite.	In	addition	to	releasing	electrons	for	reduction,	this	reaction	also
releases	energy.	The	mineral	pyrite	formed	in	this	reaction	has	interesting	properties,
in	 that	 it	 can	 strongly	 bind	 to	 all	 sorts	 of	 electrically	 charged	 molecules.	 This,
according	 to	 Wächtershäuser,	 would	 have	 allowed	 organic	 molecules	 to	 line	 up	 in
close	 proximity	 on	 the	 mineral’s	 surface	 and	 undergo	 further	 chemical	 reactions,	 a
protometabolism	 of	 sorts.	 For	 example,	 the	 universal	 metabolite	 pyruvic	 acid	 (see
chapter	3)	can	actually	be	formed	in	a	sequence	of	three	reactions:

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

CO2	+	2FeS	+	2H2S	→	CH3—SH	+	2FeS2	+	2O
CH3—SH	+	CO	→	CH3—CO—SH
CH3—CO—SH	+	CO2	+	FeS	→	CH3—CO—COOH	+	FeS2,
where	CH3—CO—COOH	is	pyruvic	acid.	Other	protometabolic	reactions	would	have
occurred	 in	 a	 similar	 fashion,	 including	 the	 synthesis	 of	 amino	 acids	 and	 nucleotides,
necessary	to	make	proteins	and	RNA,	respectively.	In	this	scenario,	there	is	no	need
for	 thioesters	 (as	 in	 de	 Duve’s	 model).	 Nor	 is	 there	 need	 for	 organic	 material	 to	 be
delivered	 from	 outer	 space	 or	 from	 a	 reducing	 atmosphere.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 this
model	 provides	 no	 clue	 regarding	 the	 functions	 of	 putative	 protoenzymes	 and	 first
nucleic	acids.
Finally,	the	American	biochemist	Sydney	Fox	proposed	that	protein	enzymes	could
have	been	produced	on	prebiotic	Earth	in	the	absence	of	genetic	information.	For	this,
he	 first	 demonstrated	 that	 amino	 acids	 analogous	 to	 those	 found	 in	 a	 Miller-type	 of
experiment	 could	 also	 be	 synthesized	 by	 simply	 heating	 aqueous	 solutions	 of
formaldehyde	and	ammonia.	These	two	compounds	can	be	formed	under	a	variety	of
plausible	 prebiotic	 scenarios.	 Next,	 he	 demonstrated	 that	 heating	 dry	 mixtures	 of
amino	 acids	 leads	 to	 the	 production	 of	 polymers	 containing	 up	 to	 several	 hundred
chemically	linked	amino	acids,	thus	mimicking	modern	proteins.	Fox	used	dry	heat	in
these	 experiments	 for	 the	 following	 reason:	 the	 linking	 of	 amino	 acids	 to	 produce
protein	polymers	cannot	happen	in	water	because	this	reaction	is	accompanied	by	the
elimination	of	a	water	molecule.	Thus	in	an	aqueous	environment,	the	water	molecules
present	 in	 the	 solution	 favor	 the	 reverse	 reaction—that	 is,	 the	 destruction	 of	 the
bonds	linking	amino	acids.
Fox	reasoned	that	some	of	the	primeval	aqueous	broth	with	its	amino	acids	could
have	 been	 splashed	 by	 the	 wind	 or	 waves	 onto	 hot	 rocks,	 where	 the	 water
evaporated	and	the	amino	acids	started	polymerizing.	This	effect	would	have	created
a	 large	 variety	 of	 randomly	 formed	 protein-like	 molecules.	 Some	 of	 these	 molecules
could	 have	 been	 endowed	 with	 enzyme	 activity	 and	 could	 have	 started	 a	 kind	 of
protometabolism,	 as	 assumed	 by	 de	 Duve	 in	 the	 case	 of	 thioester	 enzymes.	 The
question	then	is,	do	protein-like	polymers	“à	la	Fox”	made	in	the	laboratory	possess
any	kind	of	enzyme	activity?	The	answer	is	yes,	they	do,	albeit	weakly.	Furthermore,

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Fox’s	proteinoids,	as	they	are	called,	can	spontaneously	form	microscopic	spheres	in
which	 molecules	 that	 will	 be	 acted	 upon	 by	 proteinoids	 can	 be	 trapped.	 Thus	 these
microspheres	 could	 be	 seen	 as	 primitive	 cells,	 possibly	 performing	 some
protometabolic	functions.
The	 main	 line	 of	 criticism	 aimed	 at	 these	 results	 and	 interpretations	 is	 that	 such
microspheres,	 even	 if	 they	 were	 formed	 and	 persisted	 (they	 are	 quite	 unstable	 and
fragile	 under	 laboratory	 conditions),	 could	 not	 have	 evolved	 because	 they	 contain	 no
genetic	information.	Of	course,	one	could	always	retort	that	proteinoid	microspheres
could	 have	 become	 capable	 of	 synthesizing	 random	 nucleic	 acids	 that	 were
themselves	 able	 to	 evolve.	 Fox	 died	 in	 1998	 and,	 to	 my	 knowledge,	 work	 on
proteinoids	has	stopped.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

GENETIC	INFORMATION	FIRST:	THE	RNA	WORLD
Not	everyone	is	buying	the	iron-sulfur	world	hypothesis	and	its	haphazard
synthesis	 of	 protein	 catalysts	 in	 the	 total	 absence	 of	 genetic	 information.	 This
skepticism	also	applies	to	Sydney	Fox’s	theory.	Many	scientists	(possibly	a	majority)
prefer	to	think	that	genetic	information	came	first	and	that	proteins	followed	suit,	once
some	 kind	 of	 transcription/translation	 mechanism	 had	 evolved.	 For	 this	 to	 have
happened,	 it	 must	 be	 assumed	 that	 informational	 macromolecules	 such	 as	 DNA	 or
RNA	must	have	been	somehow	synthesized	in	the	absence	of	protein	enzymes.	In	the
late	1960s,	three	scientists,	Carl	Woese	of	the	United	States,	Leslie	Orgel	of	England
(but	 working	 in	 San	 Diego),	 and	 Nobel	 laureate	 Francis	 Crick	 of	 England	 (also
working	 in	 San	 Diego)	 independently	 proposed	 that	 RNA,	 not	 DNA,	 could	 have	 been
the	first	genetic	material.
There	 are	 four	 reasons	 for	 this.	 First,	 many	 viruses	 possess	 an	 RNA	 genome.
Second,	 the	 synthesis	 of	 DNA	 building	 blocks,	 deoxyribonucleotides	 (consisting	 of
nitrogenous	 bases	 linked	 to	 the	 sugar	 deoxyribose	 and	 to	 phosphate	 groups),
proceeds	 via	 ribonucleotide	 (the	 building	 blocks	 of	 RNA)	 intermediates.	 Third,	 DNA
replication	in	cells	is	“primed”	by	short	stretches	of	RNA.	And	fourth,	to	be	expressed,
DNA	genes	must	first	be	transcribed	into	RNA	molecules,	which	are	then	decoded	by
transfer	 RNAs	 on	 a	 ribosomal	 matrix	 composed	 of	 50	 percent	 RNA.	 These
observations	 suggested	 that	 RNA	 may	 be	 more	 ancestral	 than	 DNA	 and	 may	 have
constituted	the	very	first	genes.
This	hypothesis	raises	several	questions.	The	first	one	pertains	to	the	likelihood	of
synthesizing	the	building	blocks	of	RNA,	the	ribonucleotides,	made	of	the	bases	A,	U,
G,	and	C,	the	sugar	ribose,	and	three	phosphate	groups.	The	second	question	deals
with	linking	these	blocks	together	to	form	RNA	chains,	and	the	third	problem	is	how	to
make	 these	 RNA	 chains	 replicate	 (multiply)	 to	 keep	 them	 going	 so	 that	 they	 evolve
into	 genuine	 living	 cells.	 Today,	 all	 three	 mechanisms	 involve	 enzymes.	 In	 an	 RNA
world,	 there	 were	 no	 enzymes,	 and	 it	 must	 thus	 be	 assumed	 that	 ribonucleotide
synthesis,	polymerization,	and	RNA	replication	either	occurred	spontaneously	or	were

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

catalyzed	by	nonenzyme	catalysts.
We	have	seen	that	the	four	bases	could	have	been	formed	from	hydrogen	cyanide
or	 other	 carbon-	 and	 nitrogen-containing	 molecules	 under	 reducing	 conditions.
Alternatively,	 these	 bases	 could	 have	 been	 brought	 to	 Earth	 by	 meteorites	 and
comets	 (although	 cytosine	 has	 never	 been	 found	 in	 meteorites).	 The	 sugar	 ribose
could	 have	 been	 formed	 from	 the	 polymerization	 of	 formaldehyde,	 also	 presumably
abundant	 in	 the	 prebiotic	 broth,	 as	 it	 is	 in	 space.	 The	 problem	 here	 is	 that	 the
polymerization	of	formaldehyde	produces	many	other	types	of	sugars	besides	ribose,
and	 these	 other	 sugars	 also	 have	 a	 propensity	 to	 react	 with	 the	 four	 bases.	 Some
authors	 have	 recently	 proposed	 that	 in	 the	 beginning,	 nucleic	 acids	 other	 than	 RNA
may	 have	 been	 more	 prevalent.	 These	 include	 molecules	 formed	 with	 sugars
containing	 six	 carbon	 atoms	 instead	 of	 the	 five	 found	 in	 the	 ribose	 ring,	 or	 a	 fivecarbon-containing	 sugar	 (called	 threose,	 hence	 the	 abbreviation	 TNA	 for	 the	 nucleic
acids	containing	it)	with	a	structure	slightly	different	from	that	of	ribose.	Thus	it	is	not
impossible	 that	 originally	 there	 was	 a	 whole	 family	 of	 nucleic	 acids	 whose	 members
contained	 different	 sugars,	 with	 RNA	 finally	 taking	 over	 for	 unknown	 reasons.
According	to	some,	phosphorus	could	have	originated	from	organic	phosphates	found
in	meteorites.
So	 far,	 linking	 the	 four	 RNA	 bases	 to	 sugars	 in	 the	 laboratory,	 under	 plausible
prebiotic	 conditions,	 has	 been	 successful	 only	 with	 A	 and	 G.	 Such	 reactions	 with	 U
and	 C	 have	 not	 been	 observed.	 This	 is	 definitely	 a	 nagging	 problem,	 because	 it	 is
hard	to	visualize	RNA	synthesis	without	the	existence	of	ribo-U	and	ribo-C.	Can	these
compounds	 be	 formed	 in	 the	 presence	 of	 special,	 and	 as	 yet	 undiscovered,
catalysts?	Were	TNAs	involved?	We	simply	do	not	know.	On	the	other	hand,	adding
phosphate	groups	to	preformed	combinations	of	bases	and	ribose	has	been	achieved
with	 all	 four	 bases.	 The	 problem	 here	 is	 that	 many	 of	 the	 base-sugar-phosphate
combinations	(called	nucleotides)	have	structures	that	would	not	allow	polymerization
into	 RNA	 molecules.	 Clearly,	 much	 remains	 to	 be	 done	 to	 elucidate	 the	 mechanisms
by	which	correct	structures	where	formed	in	prevalent	amounts.	One	possibility	is	that
mineral	 catalysts	 favored	 the	 formation	 of	 correct	 molecular	 structures,	 but	 such
catalysts	 have	 not	 yet	 been	 discovered.	 Alternatively,	 it	 might	 be	 imagined	 that	 the
correct	 molecules	 were	 formed	 with	 the	 help	 of	 protoenzymes	 and	 pyrophosphate
previously	made	in	an	iron-sulfur	world.
Also,	 sugars	 found	 in	 modern	 nucleic	 acids	 pose	 a	 handedness	 problem,	 just	 as
seen	 with	 amino	 acids.	 The	 sugars	 present	 in	 RNA	 and	 DNA	 are	 right-handed.
However,	 prebiotic	 sugars	 must	 have	 been	 made	 in	 the	 right-	 and	 left-handed
configurations	 in	 equal	 amounts.	 We	 do	 not	 know	 how	 right-handed	 sugars	 were
eventually	 selected	 for	 the	 synthesis	 of	 nucleic	 acids.	 Nevertheless,	 assuming	 that
pools	 of	 nucleotides	 with	 the	 correct	 structure	 came	 into	 existence,	 it	 is	 now
necessary	 to	 link	 these	 nucleotides	 together	 to	 form	 RNA	 chains.	 Interestingly,	 this
has	been	achieved	in	the	laboratory	by	simply	incubating	nucleotides	in	the	presence
of	 minerals	 such	 as	 lead	 salts,	 uranium	 salts,	 zinc	 salts,	 or	 even	 clay.	 RNA	 chains
consisting	 of	 up	 to	 fifty	 bases	 linked	 together	 were	 synthesized	 on	 a	 clay

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

(montmorillonite)	 substrate.	 Quite	 certainly,	 these	 findings	 make	 plausible	 the
synthesis	of	RNA	chains	under	prebiotic	conditions.
But	 then	 there	 remains	 the	 problem	 of	 replicating	 these	 RNA	 molecules.	 Without
replication,	the	genetic	information	present	in	an	RNA	molecule	will	be	lost	as	soon	as
this	molecule	degrades.	Furthermore,	without	replication	and	errors	in	the	replication
process,	 RNA	 molecules	 once	 formed	 cannot	 change—they	 cannot	 evolve.	 Perhaps
surprisingly,	 RNA	 replication	 in	 the	 absence	 of	 enzymes	 may	 not	 have	 been	 as
daunting	 a	 challenge	 as	 was	 once	 thought.	 Clues	 to	 the	 prebiotic	 copying	 of	 RNA
molecules	were	provided	by	the	discovery	of	ribozymes,	RNA	enzymes.
Until	 1983,	 that	 all	 biological	 catalysts	 were	 protein	 enzymes	 was	 a	 firmly
entrenched	 notion.	 That	 year,	 Thomas	 Cech	 and	 Sidney	 Altman	 independently
discovered	 that	 this	 dogma	 was	 wrong.	 They	 both	 received	 the	 Nobel	 Prize	 for	 this
discovery.	 Their	 findings	 unexpectedly	 showed	 that	 RNA	 too	 possesses	 catalytic,
enzymatic	activity,	hence	the	name	ribozyme	(a	combination	of	the	words	ribonucleic
acid	 and	 enzyme).	 What	 kind	 of	 enzymatic	 activities	 are	 displayed	 by	 RNA
molecules?	First,	there	are	conditions	under	which	living	cells	“cut”	some	of	their	RNA
molecules	 by	 cleaving	 their	 ribose-phosphate	 backbone	 at	 predetermined	 positions
(figure	 4.7).	 This	 cutting	 is	 done	 by	 the	 RNA	 itself,	 with	 no	 help	 whatsoever	 from
protein	 enzymes.	 Next,	 it	 was	 discovered	 that	 ribozymes	 could	 actually	 copy
themselves	and	thus	replicate,	again,	in	the	total	absence	of	protein	enzymes!	It	must
be	 cautioned,	 however,	 that	 only	 short	 RNA	 molecules,	 a	 few	 dozen	 nucleotides	 in
length,	 can	 be	 replicated	 that	 way	 in	 the	 laboratory.	 And	 finally,	 it	 was	 recently
discovered	that	ribosomal	RNA	(present	in	the	ribosomes,	where	protein	synthesis	is
taking	place	in	cells)	is	responsible	for	the	polymerization	of	amino	acids	into	proteins.
In	 other	 words,	 it	 is	 not	 a	 ribosomal	 protein	 enzyme	 that	 hooks	 up	 amino	 acids
together	to	make	protein	chains;	ribosomal	RNA	itself	does	the	job.	Some	ribozymes
even	have	the	ability	to	splice	short	RNA	molecules	together	to	produce	longer	ones.
Finally,	 RNA	 chains	 consisting	 of	 as	 few	 as	 twenty	 nucleotides	 have	 been	 shown	 to
possess	ribozyme	activity.	This	number	is	well	within	the	ability	of	clay	to	catalyze	the
synthesis	of	RNA	chains.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	 4.7	 A	 ribozyme	 cutting	 another	 RNA	 molecule.	 A	 natural	 ribozyme,	 called	 the	 hammerhead
ribozyme,	 binds	 to	 a	 target	 RNA	 through	 base	 pair	 formation	 (short	 vertical	 and	 horizontal	 stripes).	 The	 sugarphosphate	 backbone	 of	 the	 target	 RNA	 is	 cut	 to	 the	 right	 of	 the	 base	 designated	 X	 (which	 can	 be	 any	 base).
(Adapted	from	Breaker,	R.	R.	2000.	Making	Catalytic	DNAs.	Science	290:2095–2096.)

The	 discoveries	 that	 certain	 RNA	 molecules	 can	 cut	 themselves	 and	 other	 RNA
molecules,	 that	 they	 can	 join	 RNA	 molecules	 together,	 that	 some	 ribozymes	 can
replicate,	and	that	certain	RNA	molecules	can	catalyze	the	formation	of	proteins	have
given	 credence	 to	 a	 putative	 RNA	 world.	 In	 this	 prebiotic	 world,	 primitive	 RNA
genomes	 could	 replicate,	 become	 processed	 by	 cutting	 and	 splicing,	 and	 help	 make
proteins	that	later	could	become	genuine	enzymes,	taking	over	some	of	the	ribozyme
properties	 and	 creating	 an	 integrated	 metabolic	 circuitry.	 Before	 this	 could	 happen,
RNA	 genomes	 had	 to	 evolve	 through	 replication	 and	 replication	 errors	 in	 order	 to
generate	genetic	diversity,	much	as	natural	selection	does	in	the	world	today.	We	will
see	how	this	may	have	happened	in	the	next	chapter.

CONCLUSIONS
Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

We	do	not	know	how	the	building	blocks	of	life	appeared	on	Earth.	They
may	 have	 originated	 from	 organic	 material	 present	 in	 interstellar	 clouds,	 from
meteorites	and	comets,	from	hydrothermal	vents,	from	a	reducing	atmosphere,	from
all	 four,	 or	 from	 sources	 we	 have	 not	 yet	 imagined.	 Whether	 proteins	 antedated
nucleic	 acids	 in	 an	 iron-sulfur	 world	 or	 whether	 an	 RNA	 world	 gave	 birth	 to	 the	 first
proteins	is	equally	unknown.	Perhaps	even	the	iron-sulfur	and	RNA	worlds	cooperated
to	get	life	started.	We	have	several	scenarios	but	we	do	not	know	which	one	or	ones
prevailed.	What	this	chapter	has	shown,	however,	is	that	scientists	do	not	suffer	from
a	 lack	 of	 imagination.	 The	 hypotheses	 presented	 here	 are	 testable,	 and	 new
discoveries,	such	as	the	catalytic	properties	of	RNA,	will	continue	to	provide	material
for	further	research	and	hypothesis	formulation.
In	1998,	the	British	Broadcasting	Corporation	released	a	video	entitled	“The	Origin
of	 Life:	 Researching	 the	 Possibilities.”	 I	 highly	 recommend	 it	 to	 readers,	 not	 only	 for
its	 informational	 content	 and	 its	 general	 quality	 but	 also	 for	 its	 humorous	 look	 at	 the
problem.	 The	 program	 features	 among	 others,	 Stanley	 Miller	 (in	 front	 of	 his	 famous
“gas	zapper”)	and	Günter	Wächtershäuser	(handling	a	block	of	his	cherished	pyrite).
Consciously	 or	 unconsciously,	 some	 of	 the	 scientists	 appear	 as	 enthusiastic	 nerds3
(one	 of	 them,	 unable	 to	 find	 a	 chalkboard	 to	 explain	 something	 to	 the	 interviewer,
casually	and	very	naturally	uses	his	office	door	to	write	on),	vindictive	prima	donnas,
or	self-assured	wise	men.	This	video	is	also	a	lesson	in	the	sociology	of	science.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:15:57.

