CHAPTER	2

Building	a	Universe
	
The	most	incomprehensible	thing	about	the	universe	is	that	it	is
comprehensible.
—ALBERT	EINSTEIN

	
wentieth-century	 physics,	 with	 its	 precise	 description	 of	 matter,
energy,	 and	 radiation,	 was	 merged	 with	 astronomical	 observations
to	provide	an	account	of	the	birth	of	the	universe	consistent	with	the
laws	 of	 nature.	 These	 efforts	 resulted	 in	 the	 Big	 Bang	 model	 for	 the	 creation	 of	 the
cosmos.	Since	we	do	not	(yet)	know	how	to	create	a	universe	in	the	laboratory,	some
of	 the	 Big	 Bang	 theory	 relies	 on	 mathematical	 and	 computer	 models.	 However,	 the
sciences	 of	 astrophysics	 and	 high-energy	 particle	 physics	 provide	 much	 empirical
evidence	to	support	the	theory	in	its	entirety.	In	this	chapter	we	will	see	how	the	Big
Bang	 model	 works.	 We	 will	 also	 see	 that	 the	 formation	 of	 stars	 and	 planets	 was	 a
direct	 consequence	 of	 the	 stabilization	 of	 matter,	 once	 the	 temperature	 of	 the
universe	 had	 dropped	 sufficiently,	 after	 a	 significant	 period	 of	 expansion	 of	 the
universe.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

T

COSMOLOGY:	THE	BIG	BANG	MODEL
We	saw	in	chapter	1	that	Einstein’s	general	relativity	predicts	an	unstable
universe	beginning	with	a	singularity	characterized	by	zero	space	and	infinite	energy.
Using	 the	 equations	 of	 general	 relativity,	 the	 Belgian	 priest	 and	 university	 professor
Georges	 Lemaître	 suggested	 in	 1927	 that	 the	 universe	 could	 have	 started	 from	 a
rapidly	 expanding	 “primeval	 atom,”	 as	 he	 called	 it.	 By	 this	 he	 meant	 a	 very	 small
region	 of	 expanding	 superdense	 time-space	 from	 which	 all	 matter	 and	 radiation

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

originated.	 This,	 however,	 did	 not	 solve	 the	 question	 of	 infinite	 energy.	 Infinities	 are
not	welcome	in	science.	In	fact,	nobody	knows	what	infinite	energy	is.	Therefore	the
Lemaître-Einstein	 model,	 interesting	 as	 it	 may	 be,	 cannot	 be	 used	 to	 make
predictions	 regarding	 the	 properties	 of	 space-time	 at	 time	 zero,	 the	 moment	 of	 the
Big	 Bang.	 Nonetheless,	 1927	 should	 be	 considered	 the	 birth	 year	 of	 the	 Big	 Bang
model,	even	though	nobody	called	it	that	when	this	hypothesis	was	first	put	forth.	Let
us	first	consider,	then,	what	happened	a	very	short	time	after	time	zero	and	avoid	for
now	the	infinite	energy	problem.	We	will	return	to	speculations	regarding	time	zero	at
the	end	of	this	section.
An	 extremely	 important	 clue	 to	 the	 birth	 of	 the	 universe	 was	 revealed	 when	 the
temperature	of	the	cosmos	was	measured.	The	temperature	of	intergalactic	space	is
not	 zero	 Kelvin	 (K).	 Space	 is	 actually	 pervaded	 by	 a	 background	 radiation	 of	 2.7	 K,
with	an	energy	distribution	like	that	of	a	blackbody,	and	a	peak	wavelength	of	2	mm
corresponding	 to	 a	 photon	 energy	 of	 0.00062	 electron	 volts	 (eV),	 placing	 this
radiation	 in	 the	 microwave	 range	 (remember	 that	 any	 temperature	 above	 0	 K	 is
characterized	 by	 a	 given	 electromagnetic	 radiation	 wavelength).	 This	 very	 weak
cosmic	 microwave	 background	 radiation	 is	 uniformly	 distributed	 in	 all	 directions
around	 us	 and	 thus	 fills	 the	 universe.	 Human	 eyes	 are,	 of	 course,	 unable	 to	 detect
electromagnetic	radiation	below	the	range	of	visible	light,	but	our	radio	antennae	are
able	 to	 do	 so,	 which	 is	 how	 scientists	 discovered	 this	 universal	 microwave
background.	 What	 is	 its	 origin?	 How	 is	 it	 that	 microwave	 photons	 are	 filling	 the
universe?	 Is	 there	 a	 correlation	 between	 this	 radiation	 and	 the	 beginning	 of	 the
universe?
As	 covered	 in	 chapter	 1,	 we	 know	 that	 the	 universe	 is	 expanding	 (remember
galactic	redshifts).	If	we	were	hypothetically	to	run	the	expansion	clock	backward,	we
would	 see	 that	 as	 the	 universe	 became	 smaller	 and	 smaller,	 the	 microwave
background	 radiation	 density	 would	 become	 higher	 and	 higher,	 until	 it	 reached	 an
enormous	value.	Also,	since	space	would	be	shrinking,	the	microwave	radiation	would
be	blue-shifted	and	gain	more	and	more	energy,	until	it	too	would	reach	an	enormous
level.	In	a	shrinking	universe,	the	microwave	background	would	turn	into	infrared	light,
then	 into	 visible	 light,	 and	 subsequently	 into	 short-wavelength	 light	 that	 human	 eyes
cannot	perceive.	Since	the	energy	density	of	the	universe	would	increase	drastically,
so	would	its	temperature.	We	can	even	imagine	a	point	at	which	the	temperature	and
energy	density	would	be	so	high	that	matter	particles	could	no	longer	exist	stably.	If
we	 mentally	 reverse	 the	 process,	 in	 an	 expanding	 universe	 starting	 from	 very	 high
photon	density	and	energy,	the	radiation	becomes	weaker	and	weaker	as	time	goes
by.	 The	 photon	 density	 decreases	 and	 so	 does	 the	 energy	 associated	 with	 these
photons	because	of	the	redshift	caused	by	expansion.	Consequently,	the	temperature
of	the	universe	drops,	and	at	a	certain	point,	stable	matter	can	exist.
Thinking	 along	 these	 lines,	 the	 cosmic	 background	 radiation	 must	 represent	 the
“ashes,”	 the	 “afterglow”	 of	 the	 Big	 Bang!	 At	 one	 point	 in	 time,	 the	 young	 universe
must	 have	 been	 a	 reservoir	 of	 enormously	 intense	 radiation	 at	 extremely	 high
temperature.	This	raises	the	question	of	how	old	the	universe	is.	Based	on	the	rate	of

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

expansion,	 itself	 calculated	 from	 the	 velocity	 of	 the	 most	 distant	 galaxies	 observable
today,	 the	 age	 of	 the	 universe	 is	 about	 12	 to	 15	 billion	 years	 (see	 appendix	 3).
Extrapolating	 back	 in	 time,	 it	 is	 then	 possible	 to	 calculate	 the	 temperature	 of	 the
universe	 when	 it	 was	 extremely	 small,	 fractions	 of	 a	 second	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang.
Avoiding	 infinities	 “à	 la	 Einstein,”	 we	 can	 calculate	 that	 10−43	 second	 after	 the	 Big
Bang,	the	temperature	of	the	universe	was	1031	K	and	its	radius	was	3	×	10−35	meter.
This	is	many	orders	of	magnitude	smaller	than	the	radius	of	a	proton,	putting	the	justborn	 universe	 squarely	 in	 the	 submicroscopic	 realm	 of	 quantum	 theory.	 Also,	 as
matter	 cannot	 exist	 at	 such	 a	 high	 temperature,	 it	 is	 present	 as	 very	 energetic
radiation	(or,	more	precisely,	the	conversion	of	radiation	into	matter	does	not	lead	to
stable	 matter	 because	 the	 temperature	 is	 too	 high).	 Nevertheless,	 calculations
indicate	 that	 at	 that	 time,	 the	 force	 of	 gravity	 was	 already	 separated	 from	 the	 three
other	forces	(strong,	weak,	and	electromagnetic),	even	though	stable	matter	did	not
yet	exist.
It	may	surprise	the	reader	that	gravity	existed	from	the	beginning,	in	the	absence
of	 stable	 matter	 particles.	 However,	 we	 must	 remember	 that	 energy	 possesses
mass.	Therefore	at	extremely	high	energies,	we	find	a	considerable	amount	of	mass,
hence	 the	 existence	 of	 gravity.	 Also,	 at	 such	 a	 high	 energy	 density,	 the	 curvature	 of
the	universe	must	have	been	enormous	and	we	must	also	remember	that	curvature	of
space	 is	 gravity.	 Gravity	 was	 the	 first	 force	 to	 separate,	 because	 as	 temperature
decreased,	the	mass-energy	present	in	the	expanding	volume	decreased	as	well.
The	 rest	 of	 the	 timetable	 then	 goes	 as	 shown	 in	 the	 following	 table,	 where	 the
radius	 is	 that	 of	 the	 universe	 in	 meters,	 H	 represents	 hydrogen,	 D	 is	 deuterium	 (the
heavy	isotope	of	hydrogen)	and	He	is	helium:

	
As	expansion	and	cooling	proceeded,	the	three	other	forces	(with	their	associated
Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

field	 particles)	 separated.	 Then	 matter	 particles	 with	 highest	 mass	 energy	 started
stabilizing,	followed	by	those	with	less	mass	energy.	This	is	because	matter	is	stable
when	 temperature	 is	 below	 its	 energy	 equivalent	 divided	 by	 1.5k,	 where	 k	 is	 the
Boltzmann	constant,	a	number	relating	energy	and	temperature.	Thus	the	stabilization
temperature	 is	 T	 =	 E/1.5k.	 Knowing	 that	 E	 =	 mc2,	 and	 knowing	 m,	 the	 mass	 of
elementary	particles,	one	can	calculate	their	energy	equivalent.	This	value	of	E	is	then
used	 to	 calculate	 T.	 Since	 quarks	 are	 more	 massive	 than	 baryons	 (protons	 and
neutrons),	which	in	turn	are	more	massive	than	electrons,	quarks	stabilized	first	after
the	 Big	 Bang	 (when	 the	 universe	 was	 only	 80	 cm	 in	 diameter,	 the	 size	 of	 a	 large
beach	 ball),	 followed	 by	 the	 baryons	 and	 finally	 the	 electrons	 as	 the	 universe
expanded	further	and	its	temperature	dropped	accordingly.	It	may	come	as	a	surprise
that	 baryons,	 composed	 of	 three	 quarks,	 are	 less	 massive	 than	 quarks	 themselves.
This	 is	 because	 quarks,	 as	 they	 unite	 to	 form	 baryons,	 release	 energy—and	 hence
mass—in	 the	 process.	 The	 same	 principle	 is	 at	 work	 in	 nuclear	 fusion	 (see	 the	 next
section).
It	should	be	noted	that	experimental	results	have	been	gathered	up	to	energies	of
200	GeV	(corresponding	to	a	temperature	of	2	×	1015	K)	in	particle	accelerators.	This
temperature	 corresponds	 to	 about	 10−10	 second	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang.	 Therefore	 it	 is
fair	 to	 say	 that	 we	 understand	 quite	 a	 bit	 of	 the	 physics	 involved	 in	 the	 transition
between	radiation	and	matter	in	the	very	young	universe.	What	happened	before	that
time	can	presently	be	assessed	only	by	theory,	as	we	will	see	later.
The	timetable	of	the	creation	of	the	universe	contains	several	interesting	features.
First,	 it	 should	 be	 realized	 that	 protons	 constitute	 hydrogen	 nuclei.	 H	 is	 the	 simplest
element,	with	one	proton	surrounded	by	a	single	electron.	Deuterium	is	an	isotope	of
hydrogen;	 it	 contains	 a	 single	 proton	 and	 a	 single	 neutron	 in	 its	 nucleus.	 D	 has	 only
one	 electron,	 just	 like	 H,	 and	 it	 has	 the	 same	 chemical	 properties	 as	 its	 lighter
isotope.	 The	 second	 simplest	 element	 is	 helium,	 composed	 of	 two	 protons	 and	 two
neutrons	(in	its	most	abundant	form)	surrounded	by	two	electrons.	D	nuclei	stabilized
10−3	 second	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang,	 whereas	 He	 nuclei	 stabilized	 after	 100	 seconds.	 It
can	 also	 be	 seen	 that	 formation	 of	 H,	 D,	 and	 He	 neutral	 atoms	 took	 place	 when	 the
universe	was	400,000	years	old,	when	the	temperature	had	become	low	enough	for
atoms	to	exist.
It	 is	 also	 at	 that	 time	 that	 the	 universe	 became	 transparent.	 Indeed,	 before	 that
time,	starting	at	10−9	second,	the	universe	was	a	plasma	of	independent	particles	and
radiation.	In	a	plasma,	light	cannot	travel	very	far	because	of	strong	interactions	with
particles.	 Therefore	 the	 superhot	 young	 universe	 may	 have	 looked	 like	 a	 dense,
luminous	fog.
The	table	thus	mentions	only	two	elements	created	in	the	Big	Bang:	hydrogen	and
helium	[a	third	element,	lithium	(Li),	with	three	protons	and	three	neutrons	was	formed
in	trace	amounts].	It	turns	out	that	calculations	based	on	quantum	mechanics	predict
that	a	hot	Big	Bang	should	produce	these	two	elements	in	a	precise	ratio:	76%	H	and
24%	 He	 (with	 traces	 of	 D	 and	 Li).	 And	 lo	 and	 behold,	 this	 is	 exactly	 the	 H/He	 ratio
found	 in	 the	 universe	 at	 large	 today	 (plus	 the	 traces	 of	 D	 and	 Li)!	 This	 observation

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

clearly	reinforces	the	notion	that	the	universe’s	birth	conforms	to	the	Big	Bang	model.
Figure	 2.1	 provides	 a	 graphic	 representation	 of	 the	 major	 transitions	 that	 have
occurred	in	the	universe	since	the	Big	Bang.
How	 does	 one	 explain	 this	 76:24	 ratio?	 Protons	 and	 neutrons	 are	 made	 in	 equal
amounts	 in	 the	 Big	 Bang	 and	 stabilize	 at	 about	 1012	 K.	 At	 this	 temperature,	 the
nuclear	 force	 is	 not	 strong	 enough	 to	 allow	 stable	 proton-neutron	 interactions.
However,	 as	 has	 been	 demonstrated	 experimentally,	 starting	 at	 about	 1010	 K,	 these
stable	 interactions	 are	 made	 possible.	 But	 neutrons	 are	 slightly	 more	 massive	 than
protons	 (by	 about	 1.3	 million	 eV),	 meaning	 that	 the	 balance	 between	 neutrons	 and
protons	 will	 shift	 toward	 the	 latter	 as	 the	 temperature	 of	 the	 universe	 drops.	 This	 is
because	 the	 conversion	 of	 protons	 into	 neutrons	 and	 vice	 versa	 favors	 protons	 at
lower	 temperatures.	 By	 the	 time	 the	 nuclear	 force	 allows	 proton-neutron	 binding,
there	 are	 only	 twelve	 neutrons	 left	 for	 eighty-eight	 protons.	 The	 twelve	 neutrons	 will
unite	with	twelve	protons	to	make	six	helium	nuclei,	each	actually	originating	from	the
fusion	 of	 two	 deuterons	 (deuterium	 nuclei),	 each	 containing	 one	 proton	 and	 one
neutron.	 This	 step	 is	 called	 nucleosynthesis	 because	 atomic	 nuclei	 are	 being
synthesized.	 Then	 the	 remaining	 seventy-six	 protons	 will	 remain	 alone	 and	 will
become	 hydrogen	 nuclei	 that	 later	 will	 form	 the	 76	 percent	 hydrogen	 atoms	 once
these	 protons	 each	 capture	 an	 electron.	 The	 formation	 of	 nuclei	 heavier	 than	 helium
(other	 than	 the	 traces	 of	 D	 and	 Li)	 cannot	 proceed	 because	 the	 expansion	 of	 the
universe,	and	hence	a	great	decrease	in	particle	density,	prevents	further	interactions
between	nuclei.	This	also	means	that	the	synthesis	of	elements	of	atomic	mass	higher
than	4	(i.e.,	He)	must	have	taken	place	elsewhere,	and	not	in	the	Big	Bang.	This	point
will	be	discussed	in	the	next	section.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	2.1	Diagram	showing	the	major	transitions	that	have	taken	place	in	the	universe	since	its	birth.
The	top	portion	shows	the	separation	of	what	is	sometime	called	supergravity	(a	single	force	that	existed	briefly	at
the	 time	 of	 the	 Big	 Bang)	 into	 gravity	 and	 a	 “grand	 unified	 force.”	 The	 grand	 unified	 force	 then	 separates	 into	 the
strong	force	and	the	electroweak	force.	Subsequently,	the	electroweak	force	separates	into	the	weak	force	and	the
electromagnetic	 force.	 The	 field	 particles	 that	 mediate	 the	 action	 of	 the	 four	 forces	 are	 also	 represented.	 The
bottom	 portion	 of	 the	 diagram	 shows	 the	 timetable	 for	 the	 appearance	 of	 matter	 particles	 and	 first	 atoms
(neutrinos	have	been	ignored	for	simplicity).	The	time	and	temperature	scales	are	not	linear.	Photon	decoupling	from
matter	indicates	the	time	and	temperature	at	which	the	universe	became	transparent	to	light.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

Taken	 together,	 Einstein’s	 unstable	 universe,	 the	 cosmic	 microwave	 background
radiation,	 the	 redshift,	 and	 the	 precise	 H:He	 ratio	 predicted	 by	 theory	 make	 an
extremely	 solid	 case	 for	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 universe	 through	 a	 hot	 Big	 Bang.	 Some
competing	theories,	such	as	a	steady-state	universe	that	is	expanding	but	has	existed
for	 all	 eternity,	 have	 been	 presented.	 However,	 these	 theories	 do	 not	 agree	 with
observations	 (nor	 can	 they	 explain	 the	 microwave	 background	 radiation)	 and	 hence
must	be	rejected.
For	 a	 variety	 of	 reasons,1	 including	 the	 fact	 that	 there	 exist	 in	 the	 universe	 stars
and	galaxies,	not	just	the	two	gases	H	and	He	in	a	uniform	and	dispersed	state,	many
scientists	now	accept	the	idea	of	an	inflationary	period	that	took	place	between	10−33
and	 10−32	 second	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang.	 This	 rapid	 inflation	 brought	 the	 size	 of	 the
universe	from	3	×	10−27	m	to	10	cm.	At	the	end	of	inflation,	the	universe	had	ceased
to	 be	 a	 quantum	 object.	 By	 stretching	 the	 nascent	 universe	 so	 quickly,	 it	 is	 thought
that	 any	 subtle	 preexisting	 patchiness	 in	 the	 energy	 distribution	 would	 have	 been
maintained	because	full	thermal	equilibrium	would	have	been	prevented.	Once	energy
converted	 into	 matter,	 this	 patchiness	 was	 kept,	 and	 it	 is	 recognized	 today	 as	 stars
and	 galaxies.	 If	 there	 was	 indeed	 inflation	 that	 led	 to	 a	 nonuniform	 distribution	 of
matter,	 the	 cosmic	 microwave	 background	 radiation	 should	 also	 show	 subtle
nonuniformity	 because	 this	 would	 reflect	 the	 presence	 of	 heterogeneities	 from
practically	 the	 beginning.	 This	 was	 actually	 demonstrated	 by	 microwave	 detection
equipment	carried	by	satellites	and	high-altitude	balloons;	the	microwave	background
radiation	is	very	smooth,	but	it	is	not	completely	smooth.
In	 summary,	 the	 standard	 model	 for	 the	 creation	 of	 the	 universe	 is	 very	 solid.
Quantum	physics	and	relativity	provide	consistent	explanations	regarding	the	creation
of	space-time,	matter,	forces,	and	radiation.	Inflation	seems	to	explain	the	properties
of	 the	 universe	 as	 we	 know	 it	 today.	 However,	 most	 people	 want	 to	 know	 what
happened	at	the	Big	Bang	and	what	caused	it.	I	was	told	that	one	of	my	colleagues
once	 said	 in	 an	 introductory	 biology	 class,	 “The	 Big	 Bang,	 eh!	 Who	 pulled	 the
trigger?”	 Doubtlessly,	 he	 was	 being	 facetious.	 Nevertheless,	 people	 and	 scientists
want	 to	 know,	 if	 not	 who	 pulled	 the	 trigger,	 at	 least	 what	 pulled	 the	 trigger.
Unfortunately,	 no	 simple	 explanation	 can	 be	 provided	 yet.	 What	 happened	 at	 time
zero	 and	 how	 it	 happened	 are	 two	 questions	 at	 the	 ultimate	 frontiers	 of	 science.
Theorists	 are	 quite	 active	 in	 this	 area	 and	 the	 following	 are	 some	 propositions	 they
have	devised:
First,	 the	 universe	 at	 the	 Big	 Bang	 may	 not	 have	 had	 a	 size	 of	 zero.	 This
possibility	would	violate	the	uncertainty	principle	of	quantum	mechanics.	The	minimum
possible	 size	 in	 the	 universe’s	 timetable,	 1.62	 ×	 10−35	 m,	 is	 called	 the	 Planck	 length,
and	it,	together	with	the	Planck	time,	5.39	×	10−44	second	after	the	Big	Bang,	are	the
smallest	 “knowable”	 parameters	 for	 the	 nascent	 universe.2	 Thus	 time	 “zero”	 is	 not
really	 zero,	 and	 the	 same	 holds	 true	 for	 zero	 space.	 This	 avoids	 the	 problem	 of
infinite	energy	in	a	purely	Einsteinian	universe.
Next,	 the	 uncertainty	 principle	 allows	 the	 universe	 to	 have	 been	 created	 from
nothing!	 As	 we	 have	 seen,	 Heisenberg’s	 principle	 can	 be	 written	 ∆E	 ·	 ∆t	 ≥	 h/2π.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

Following	this,	if	the	energy	content	of	the	universe	is	zero,	the	indeterminacy	of	E	is
also	zero.	The	consequence	of	this	concept	is	mindboggling,	because	if	∆E	=	0,	then
∆t	≥	(h/2π)/0,	meaning	that	∆t	 ≥	 ∞,	 which	 is	 an	 infinity	 (because	 any	 number	 divided
by	zero	is	an	infinity)!	Thus	the	universe	could	exist	for	an	infinite	time	(not	necessarily
in	 its	 present	 form,	 but	 still	 composed	 of	 matter	 and	 radiation)	 provided	 it	 contained
zero	energy.	But	is	the	universe’s	energy	content	zero?	Many	cosmologists	think	that
this	is	the	case	and	that	matter-energy	(that	is,	the	energy	equivalent	of	all	matter	in
the	 universe)	 is	 exactly	 balanced	 by	 negative	 gravitational	 energy.	 Even	 though
gravitation	 is	 always	 attractive,	 it	 can	 be	 thought	 of	 as	 a	 form	 of	 negative	 energy
because	it	binds	matter	together.	Therefore	in	an	expanding	universe,	where	matter	is
being	dispersed,	gravitation	has	a	negative	sign.	The	idea	of	creating	a	universe	from
nothing	is	not	completely	wild;	we	have	seen	that	a	vacuum	is	full	of	virtual	particles,
as	demonstrated	by	the	Casimir	effect.	In	a	similar	scenario,	the	universe	could	have
been	 born	 from	 quantum	 fluctuations	 of	 the	 vacuum,	 with	 the	 universe	 tunneling	 (see
chapter	 1)	 into	 existence.3	 In	 that	 picture,	 there	 is	 no	 trigger:	 nothing	 but	 chance
caused	the	Big	Bang.
Then	 there	 is	 the	 question	 of	 what	 happened	 before	 the	 Big	 Bang.	 For	 many
scientists	 this	 is	 a	 philosophical	 rather	 than	 a	 scientific	 question.	 And	 we	 have	 seen
that	the	Planck	time	limits	our	ability	to	go	back	to	true	zero.	At	any	rate,	it	would	be
extremely	 difficult,	 if	 not	 impossible,	 to	 see	 what	 the	 universe	 looked	 like	 before	 it
reached	 an	 age	 of	 about	 400,000	 years.	 We	 have	 a	 chance	 to	 glimpse	 at	 what	 the
universe	 looked	 like	 after	 this	 time,	 by	 devising	 more	 and	 more	 powerful	 telescopes
that	 can	 reach	 farther	 and	 farther	 into	 the	 distant	 universe	 at	 higher	 and	 higher
redshift.	 For	 this,	 light	 from	 these	 distant	 objects	 needs	 to	 reach	 us,	 and	 we	 have
seen	 that	 the	 universe	 was	 not	 transparent	 to	 light	 until	 400,000	 years	 after	 its
creation.	Events	before	that	time	are	hidden	in	a	quantum	fog.4
Nevertheless,	 theorists	 are	 speculating	 on	 the	 properties	 of	 the	 universe	 around
the	 Planck	 time	 and	 have	 come	 up	 with	 models	 describing	 “bubble	 universes”	 (or
“multiverse”),	 in	 which	 our	 own	 universe	 is	 but	 a	 corner	 of	 a	 total	 cosmos	 containing
multiple,	isolated	universes.	These	bubble	universes	could	be	seen	as	tunneling	out	of
preexisting	 universes.	 Others	 think	 that	 time	 really	 had	 no	 beginning	 at	 all.	 In	 that
view,	space-time	itself	is	curved.	This	allows	for	space-time	to	be	finite	(as	imposed
by	a	model	involving	a	beginning	for	the	universe)	yet	to	have	no	boundary.	A	familiar
analogy	is	that	of	the	surface	of	a	sphere,	which	is	curved	and	finite	and	yet	has	no
boundaries.	 In	 that	 sense,	 the	 idea	 of	 a	 singularity	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 space-time
disappears.	 This	 concept	 reduces	 even	 further	 the	 need	 for	 a	 trigger	 and,	 together
with	 the	 uncertainty	 principle,	 does	 away	 with	 causality.	 In	 that	 sense,	 the	 universe
simply	is.
At	any	rate,	this	is	not	the	place	for	cosmological	speculations.	We	are	interested
in	the	origin	of	matter,	because	living	things	are	made	of	matter,	and	so	far,	we	have
seen	 that	 the	 creation	 of	 matter	 is	 a	 direct	 consequence	 of	 the	 Big	 Bang.	 However,
the	 Big	 Bang	 created	 only	 two	 elements,	 hydrogen	 and	 helium.	 Hydrogen	 is	 very
abundant	 in	 living	 matter	 (representing	 63	 percent	 of	 the	 human	 body	 by	 number	 of

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

atoms),	while	helium	is	completely	absent	from	molecules	that	constitute	life.	In	fact,
helium	is	a	very	unreactive	gas	and	could	not	have	become	one	of	the	constituents	of
living	 cells.	 But	 then	 where	 did	 all	 the	 other	 elements,	 such	 as	 carbon,	 oxygen,
nitrogen,	 and	 several	 metals	 such	 as	 calcium,	 iron,	 and	 magnesium,	 so	 prevalent	 in
living	cells,	come	from?	We	now	know	their	origin:	they	were	made	in	stars.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

THE	GENESIS	OF	STARS	AND	PLANETS
The	 mechanism	 by	 which	 stars	 emit	 light	 is	 well	 understood.	 It	 can	 be
replicated	 on	 Earth	 by	 detonating	 nuclear	 fusion	 bombs,	 the	 most	 destructive
weapons	 known	 to	 humans.	 Much	 as	 fission	 bombs	 (the	 regular	 A-bombs)	 are	 the
result	 of	 an	 understanding	 of	 the	 mass-energy	 relationship	 provided	 by	 special
relativity,	 so	 fusion	 bombs	 (H-bombs)	 are	 unfortunately	 a	 direct	 spinoff	 of	 our
understanding	 of	 the	 way	 stars	 shine.	 Nuclear	 fusion,	 as	 in	 H-bombs,	 is	 the	 process
by	 which	 atomic	 nuclei	 are	 forced	 to	 fuse	 under	 high	 pressure	 and	 high	 temperature
conditions.	 This	 process	 results	 in	 the	 release	 of	 tremendous	 amounts	 of	 energy,
because	 atomic	 nuclei	 possess	 less	 energy	 than	 the	 free	 baryons	 composing	 them.
When	these	baryons	(protons	and	neutrons)	are	forced	together	to	form	new	nuclei,
the	 whole	 contains	 less	 energy	 than	 the	 parts.	 This	 excess	 energy	 is	 released	 in	 Hbombs	 as	 electromagnetic	 radiation	 and	 heat	 (another	 form	 of	 electromagnetic
radiation).	 This	 is	 also	 exactly	 the	 way	 stars	 function:	 they	 fuse	 atomic	 nuclei	 and
release	fusion	energy	and	light	into	space.
In	the	young	universe,	after	hydrogen	and	helium	were	synthesized,	nuclear	fusion
would	 not	 have	 been	 possible	 without	 concentrating	 these	 gases	 in	 parts	 of	 the
expanding	 universe.	 This	 is	 where	 the	 consequences	 of	 inflation	 may	 have	 played	 a
role.	 The	 slight	 variations	 seen	 in	 the	 distribution	 of	 the	 microwave	 background
radiation	 possibly	 correspond	 to	 heterogeneities	 of	 matter	 as	 well,	 these
heterogeneities	forming	a	considerable	time	before	stars	and	galaxies	appeared.	It	is
thought	 that	 these	 heterogeneities	 gave	 rise	 to	 large	 clouds	 of	 hydrogen	 and	 helium
synthesized	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang.	 These	 clouds,	 called	 protogalaxies,	 underwent
gravitational	 contraction	 between	 about	 400,000	 and	 150	 million	 years	 after	 the	 Big
Bang.	The	general	temperature	of	the	universe	dropped	from	3000	K	to	16	K	during
that	period.
However,	 as	 the	 protogalaxies	 contracted,	 their	 temperature	 increased	 because
the	 kinetic	 energy	 of	 the	 infalling	 gas	 was	 converted	 into	 heat.	 This	 temperature
increase	 is	 not	 to	 be	 confused	 with	 the	 general	 temperature	 of	 the	 universe,	 which
eventually	 dropped	 to	 2.7	 K.	 The	 temperature	 increase	 occurred	 locally,	 inside	 the
protogalaxies	only.	Over	time,	it	must	be	assumed	that	the	protogalaxies	fragmented
into	 smaller	 contracting	 clouds,	 the	 protostars.	 When	 the	 temperature	 inside	 the
contracting	 protostars	 reached	 15	 million	 K,	 the	 repulsive	 force	 between	 protons	 (H
nuclei	 stripped	 by	 heat	 of	 their	 electrons)	 was	 overcome	 and	 protons	 collided	 and
then	 fused	 to	 form	 helium	 nuclei.	 The	 stars	 lit	 up.	 Now,	 helium	 made	 in	 stars	 by	 the

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

fusion	of	two	hydrogen	nuclei	contains	two	protons	but	also	two	neutrons.	Where	are
the	 latter	 coming	 from?	 The	 hydrogen	 fusion	 mechanism	 has	 been	 elucidated	 and
looks	like	this:
H1	+	H1	→	D2	+	β++	ν,
where	H1	represents	a	proton,	D2	is	a	deuterium	nucleus	composed	of	a	proton	and	a
neutron,	 β+	 is	 a	 positive	 electron	 (also	 called	 antielectron	 or	 positron),	 and	 ν	 is	 a
neutrino.	This	means	that	in	the	reaction,	one	proton	is	conserved	and	the	other	one
is	 converted	 into	 a	 neutron	 by	 emission	 of	 a	 positron	 and	 a	 neutrino	 (through	 the
action	of	the	weak	force).	The	superscripts	represent	the	number	of	baryons	present
in	each	nucleus.
Then	the	reaction	proceeds	as	follows:
D2	+	H1	→	He3	+	γ,
where	He3	is	the	light	isotope	of	helium,	containing	two	protons	and	one	neutron,	and
γ	 is	 electromagnetic	 radiation	 of	 very	 high	 frequency.	 In	 the	 next	 step	 two	 of	 these
helium	nuclei	fuse:

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

He3	+	He3	→	He4	+	2H1,
where	 He4	 is	 the	 isotope	 of	 helium	 containing	 two	 protons	 and	 two	 neutrons.	 This
series	 of	 reactions	 is	 called	 the	 pp-chain.	 In	 other	 words,	 stars	 fuse	 hydrogen	 to
make	 helium,	 and	 large	 amounts	 of	 energy	 are	 also	 produced.	 The	 fusion	 reaction
has	two	important	consequences:	first,	the	energy	provided	by	the	reaction	stabilizes
the	 star	 and	 prevents	 gravitational	 collapse	 under	 its	 own	 weight.	 Second,	 it	 is
expected	 that,	 as	 a	 star	 ages,	 its	 H:He	 ratio	 will	 decrease,	 as	 hydrogen	 is	 being
consumed	 to	 synthesize	 helium.	 Scientists	 have	 actually	 observed	 this	 process.	 The
helium	content	of	the	Sun’s	core,	for	example,	is	very	far	from	the	primeval	H:He	ratio
of	76	percent	to	24	percent.	The	Sun,	which	is	about	5	billion	years	old,	contains	38
percent	H	and	62	percent	He	in	its	core.	Another	chain	of	reactions,	called	the	carbon
cycle,	also	powers	stars,	and	it,	too,	results	in	the	fusion	of	hydrogen	into	helium	with
release	of	energy.	It	is	called	the	carbon	cycle	because	its	initial	step	is	to	fuse	one
carbon	 nucleus	 with	 one	 hydrogen	 nucleus	 to	 make	 a	 nitrogen	 nucleus.	 Carbon	 is
regenerated	at	a	later	stage	and	cycled	back	into	the	chain.
In	 fact,	 nuclear	 fusion	 in	 stars	 does	 not	 stop	 at	 the	 formation	 of	 helium.	 It	 has
been	 shown	 that	 all	 elements	 up	 to	 iron	 are	 synthesized	 in	 the	 core	 of	 stars.	 This
happens	after	the	star	has	exhausted	its	hydrogen	and	starts	using	helium	as	nuclear
fuel.	This	process	is	made	possible	by	the	gravitational	contraction	of	the	helium	core,
which	brings	its	temperature	to	100	million	K	and	allows	helium	fusion.	The	first	step
is	 the	 fusion	 of	 three	 helium	 nuclei	 to	 make	 carbon.	 Through	 a	 complicated	 chain	 of
reactions,	more	helium	nuclei	fuse	with	the	newly	synthesized	carbon	to	form	heavier
elements,	 such	 as	 neon,	 sodium,	 and	 magnesium,	 until	 iron	 is	 reached.	 Iron,	 which
contains	 twenty-six	 protons	 (and	 a	 variable	 number	 of	 neutrons,	 depending	 on	 the
isotope)	 is	 the	 most	 stable	 element	 and	 can	 be	 fused	 with	 other	 nuclei	 only	 under

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

temperature	 conditions	 not	 found	 in	 normal	 stars.	 However,	 iron	 is	 certainly	 not	 the
heaviest	 possible	 element;	 elements	 containing	 up	 to	 103	 protons	 have	 been
identified.	Where	do	these	come	from?	To	understand	their	origin,	one	must	first	learn
about	the	fate	of	stars.
Our	Sun	is	about	5	billion	years	old	and	has	enough	fuel	left	to	shine	for	another	8
billion.	 However,	 it	 will	 not	 remain	 the	 same	 for	 the	 rest	 of	 its	 life.	 As	 hydrogen	 is
being	 exhausted,	 and	 as	 helium	 fusion	 starts	 proceeding,	 the	 inner	 core	 of	 a	 star
heats	up,	as	we	saw	earlier.	One	consequence	of	this	higher	core	temperature	is	the
expansion	of	the	outer	shell	of	the	star,	which	becomes	cooler.	Such	stars	are	called
red	 giants	 because	 their	 diameter	 expands	 enormously	 and	 their	 cooler	 outer	 layer
emits	 light	 in	 the	 less	 energetic	 red	 region	 of	 the	 spectrum.	 The	 Sun	 will	 eventually
become	a	red	supergiant,	engulfing	and	incinerating	Earth.	When	fusion	in	the	core	of
a	red	supergiant	stops,	the	star	collapses	and	becomes	a	white	dwarf,	whose	fate	is
to	become	an	extinguished	star	once	all	fusion	reactions	stop.
Stars	that	are	significantly	more	massive	than	the	Sun	experience	a	very	different
fate.	When	such	a	star	reaches	the	end	of	its	red	supergiant	state,	its	core	collapse,
because	of	its	higher	mass,	is	extremely	violent	and	quick.	Instead	of	a	white	dwarf,
the	core	is	turned	into	an	extremely	dense	neutron	star	(where	protons	are	fused	with
electrons)	 or	 an	 even	 more	 dense	 black	 hole	 (so	 called	 because	 the	 density	 and
gravity	 of	 such	 an	 object	 are	 so	 high	 that	 even	 light	 cannot	 escape	 it).	 This	 violent
collapse	 causes	 a	 shock	 wave	 that	 makes	 the	 outer	 layers	 of	 the	 star	 explode	 and
blow	out	into	space	(figure	2.2).	 This	 phenomenon	 is	 called	 a	 supernova.	 The	 shock
wave	 brings	 the	 star’s	 outer	 layers	 to	 extremely	 high	 temperature,	 high	 enough	 to
force	atomic	nuclei	to	fuse	and	synthesize	elements	heavier	than	iron.	(This	is	a	great
simplification	of	the	actual	mechanisms	leading	to	the	synthesis	of	heavy	elements.)
Thus	this	is	where	chemical	elements	other	than	hydrogen	and	helium	come	from:
they	are	made	in	stars	and	released	into	space	through	the	violent	death	of	the	stars.
The	 amount	 of	 matter	 released	 into	 space	 by	 a	 supernova	 explosion	 is	 numbered	 in
the	billions	of	billions	of	billions	of	tons	(about	1027	tons	or	more).	For	reference,	the
mass	 of	 Earth	 is	 only	 about	 6	 ×	 1021	 tons.	 Therefore	 a	 single	 supernova	 explosion
releases	 into	 space	 the	 equivalent	 of	 1,000,000	 Earths	 or	 more.	 Supernova	 events
are	not	rare;	they	occur	about	once	every	100	years	in	the	average	galaxy.	It	is	this
star	 dust	 that	 is	 at	 the	 origin	 of	 planets	 and	 second-generation	 stars—that	 is,	 stars
formed	from	the	remnants	of	supernova	explosions	mixed	with	primeval	hydrogen	and
helium.	The	Sun	is	such	a	second-generation	star.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

FIGURE	2.2	Ring	of	ejected	stellar	debris	surrounding	the	remnant	of	a	star	that	became	a	supernova	in

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

1987	in	the	Large	Magellanic	Cloud.	The	ring	is	expanding	at	6	million	miles	per	hour.	Photo	taken	by	the	Hubble
Space	Telescope.	(Courtesy	of	the	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration.)

Interestingly,	 deep	 space	 observations	 with	 the	 Hubble	 space	 telescope	 (named
after	 the	 discoverer	 of	 the	 galactic	 redshift-distance	 correlation)	 have	 revealed	 that
the	galaxies	at	high	redshift,	as	far	away	from	Earth	as	10	billion	light-years,	do	not
show	 the	 complex	 chemistry	 observed	 in	 nearer	 galaxies.	 This	 is	 because	 these
galaxies	 were	 formed	 only	 2	 billion	 years	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang	 and	 have	 not	 yet	 had
time	 (as	 we	 see	 them	 today)	 to	 produce	 much	 in	 terms	 of	 elements	 heavier	 than
hydrogen	and	helium.	The	existence	of	life	in	these	galaxies	(again,	as	we	see	them
today)	is	therefore	unlikely.
First-generation	 stars	 are	 those	 that	 were	 created	 directly	 from	 the	 primeval
hydrogen	 and	 helium	 clouds.	 These	 stars	 are	 called	 iron-poor	 because	 they	 contain
less	 iron	 than	 another	 class	 of	 stars,	 called	 second-generation	 stars,	 which	 contain
more	 iron	 (and	 many	 other	 elements)	 than	 first-generation	 stars	 because	 they
originate	 from	 the	 debris	 of	 supernova	 explosions.	 This	 debris,	 containing	 gases,
metals,	 and	 silicates	 in	 the	 form	 of	 dust,	 forms	 visible	 clouds	 in	 the	 universe	 (figure
2.3),	 and	 these	 clouds	 are	 the	 birthplace	 of	 second-generation	 stars.	 These	 clouds
can	 collapse	 and	 concentrate,	 perhaps	 through	 the	 shock	 wave	 of	 a	 nearby
supernova,	 to	 form	 rotating,	 further	 collapsing	 discs.	 As	 the	 center	 of	 the	 disc
reaches	 fusion	 ignition	 temperature,	 the	 second-generation	 star	 lights	 up.	 However,
this	 does	 not	 mean	 that	 the	 whole	 dust	 disc	 is	 involved	 in	 star	 formation.	 In	 fact,	 a

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

good	 portion	 of	 the	 disc	 remains	 separated	 from	 the	 newborn	 star	 and	 can	 actually
be	seen	as	an	opaque	halo	around	the	star.	Astronomers	have	detected	this	type	of
structure	 around	 several	 nearby	 stars	 (figure	 2.4);	 it	 is	 called	 a	 protoplanetary	 disc
because	it	is	thought	that	planets	originate	from	the	coalescence	of	the	outer	regions
of	the	disc.
In	 addition	 to	 H,	 He,	 metals,	 and	 silicates,	 a	 protoplanetary	 disc	 contains
molecules	commonly	found	in	space,	such	as	molecular	hydrogen	(H2),	water	(H2O),
nitrogen	(N2),	hydrogen	cyanide	(HCN),	carbon	monoxide	(CO),	and	ammonia	(NH3),
which	can	all	be	identified	by	their	specific	spectra.	These	compounds,	together	with
many	metals,	are	found	in	comets	that	sometimes	go	under	the	familiar	name	of	“dirty
snowballs.”	Comets	are	thought	to	be	composed	of	the	primordial	matter	that	formed
the	protoplanetary	disc	that	at	one	time	surrounded	the	Sun.	In	the	case	of	the	solar
system,	 the	 protoplanetary	 disc	 broke	 up	 into	 ten	 rings,	 representing	 the	 nine	 future
planets	 and	 the	 asteroid	 belt	 found	 between	 Mars	 and	 Jupiter.	 According	 to	 one
model,	the	heat	of	the	Sun	liquefied	the	frozen	gases,	with	the	result	that	the	grains	of
protoplanetary	 matter	 became	 moist	 and	 agglomerated	 (accreted)	 into	 chunks	 of
material.	 These	 chunks,	 called	 planetisimals,	 started	 colliding	 with	 one	 another
through	 gravitational	 attraction	 and	 accordingly	 grew	 larger,	 forming	 the	 planets	 and
their	 satellites.	 Computer	 simulations	 show	 that	 this	 process	 of	 accretion	 may	 have
taken	 100	 million	 years.	 This	 view	 was,	 however,	 challenged	 recently	 by	 the
observation	 of	 star	 and	 planet	 formation	 in	 the	 Orion	 nebula	 (visible	 with	 the	 naked
eye	as	the	middle	“star”	of	Orion’s	knife).	These	telescope	observations	indicate	that
planets	could	form	in	as	little	time	as	10	million	years.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	 2.3	 Dust	 clouds	 with	 star	 formation:	 the	 Eagle	 Nebula.	 Photo	 taken	 by	 the	 Hubble	 Space
Telescope.	(Courtesy	of	the	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration.)

The	 energy	 stored	 by	 accreting	 planetisimals	 (the	 result	 of	 the	 kinetic	 energy
possessed	 by	 colliding	 planetisimals)	 must	 have	 been	 considerable	 and,	 combined
with	 the	 heat	 of	 decaying	 radioactive	 elements	 present	 in	 them,	 may	 have	 liquefied
the	 growing	 planets.	 As	 a	 result,	 the	 metals,	 which	 are	 more	 dense	 than	 silicates,
sank	 to	 the	 center	 of	 the	 newly	 formed	 planets,	 while	 silicates	 and	 other	 minerals
floated	 toward	 the	 surface.	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 the	 planets	 degassed	 and	 acquired
their	 original	 atmospheres	 consisting	 perhaps	 of	 hydrogen,	 helium,	 methane,	 water
vapor,	 nitrogen,	 ammonia,	 and	 hydrogen	 sulfide	 (plus	 small	 amounts	 of	 the	 inert
gases	 argon,	 neon,	 krypton,	 and	 xenon).	 Some	 of	 these	 gases	 were	 generated
through	 volcanic	 activity	 and	 the	 others	 corresponded	 to	 primeval	 galactic	 gases.
Note	that	there	was	no	oxygen	as	gas	(O2)	anywhere	in	the	solar	system.	The	small
planetary	bodies,	like	the	Moon	and	Mercury,	quickly	lost	their	atmospheres,	while	the
larger	 ones	 retained	 them.	 The	 process	 of	 planet	 formation	 in	 the	 solar	 system
stopped	3.8	billion	years	ago,	as	shown	by	the	study	of	lunar	rocks	that	still	hold	the

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

traces	 of	 the	 heavy	 bombardment	 period	 that	 corresponded	 to	 the	 end	 of	 planetary
accretion.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	 2.4	 Protoplanetary	 dust	 disks	 obscuring	 light	 emitted	 by	 young	 stars.	 Photos	 taken	 by	 the
Hubble	Space	Telescope	and	by	the	IRAS	satellite.	(Courtesy	of	the	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration.)

Until	 recently	 there	 was	 no	 evidence	 that	 planetary	 systems	 exist	 around	 stars
other	 than	 the	 Sun.	 This	 view	 has	 changed	 considerably	 since	 1995,	 the	 date	 of	 the
discovery	of	the	first	extrasolar	planet	in	orbit	around	the	star	51	Pegasi.	At	the	end
of	 the	 year	 2000,	 about	 four	 dozen	 extrasolar	 planets	 had	 been	 discovered.	 Our
present	 instruments	 can	 detect	 only	 large	 extrasolar	 planets,	 the	 size	 of	 our	 Jupiter
(the	 largest	 planet	 in	 the	 solar	 system)	 or	 larger	 (figure	 2.5).	 Quite	 unexpectedly,
several	of	these	very	large	extrasolar	planets	have	orbits	around	their	stars	that	are
smaller	than	Earth’s	orbit	around	the	Sun.	These	planets	have	thus	been	dubbed	“hot
Jupiters.”	We	do	not	know	the	composition	of	these	planets,	but	what	we	do	know	is
that	our	theory	of	planet	formation	may	have	to	be	revised	once	we	learn	more	about
them.	 Indeed,	 until	 1995,	 the	 only	 planetary	 system	 we	 had	 been	 able	 to	 study	 was
our	 own,	 and	 in	 our	 case,	 smaller	 planets	 like	 Mercury,	 Venus,	 Earth,	 and	 Mars	 are
closest	 to	 the	 Sun.	 The	 gas	 giants—Jupiter,	 Saturn,	 Uranus,	 and	 Neptune—have
much	larger	orbits.	We	do	not	yet	understand	how	the	hot	Jupiters	could	have	formed
and	 remain	 stable	 so	 close	 to	 their	 stars	 in	 the	 extrasolar	 systems.	 This	 not	 to	 say
that	hot	Jupiters	are	gas	giants;	we	simply	have	no	information	on	them	yet.
The	 formation	 of	 planets	 begs	 the	 question	 of	 how	 life	 can	 appear	 on	 them.	 In
other	 words,	 under	 what	 conditions	 is	 a	 planetary	 body	 able	 to	 generate	 life?	 Since
the	 only	 life	 we	 know	 is	 based	 on	 carbon,	 hydrogen,	 oxygen,	 nitrogen,	 phosphorus,

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

sulfur,	 and	 a	 few	 other	 minor	 elements,	 these	 elements	 must	 be	 present	 on	 the
planet.	This	should	not	be	a	problem	with	planets	revolving	around	second-generation
stars.	Then	there	is	the	question	of	the	atmosphere.	This	problem	will	be	discussed	in
chapter	4.	For	now	let	us	just	say	that	there	is	general	agreement	on	the	absence	of
oxygen	 gas	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 of	 the	 young	 Earth.	 This	 should	 not	 have	 been	 an
impediment	to	the	appearance	of	life.	Indeed,	we	know	today	of	many	living	species
that	do	not	require	oxygen	for	proliferation	and	for	whom,	in	fact,	oxygen	is	very	toxic.
Hence,	 oxygen	 in	 the	 atmosphere	 is	 not	 a	 prerequisite	 for	 life.	 Other	 gases	 such	 as
methane,	 carbon	 monoxide,	 carbon	 dioxide,	 ammonia,	 and	 hydrogen	 sulfide	 can
perfectly	well	sustain	certain	life-forms,	as	we	will	see	in	the	next	chapter.
For	life	to	exist,	liquid	water	should	be	present,	at	least	part	of	the	time.	We	know
of	life	forms	deeply	embedded	in	Antarctic	ice,	but	these	cells	still	do	depend	on	the
percolation	of	liquid	surface	water	between	ice	crystals.	The	same	holds	true	for	cells
living	deep	inside	Earth’s	crust.	The	presence	of	liquid	water	directly	depends	on	the
planet’s	 distance	 from	 its	 star,	 hence	 its	 surface	 temperature	 and	 also	 its	 mass.	 A
planet	too	close	to	the	Sun,	such	as	Venus,	cannot	have	liquid	water	because	it	is	too
hot,	while	the	Moon’s	gravity	is	too	low	to	hold	any	kind	of	gas	(including	water	vapor,
if	 it	 was	 ever	 present).	 Mars	 may	 have	 had	 abundant	 water	 in	 its	 distant,	 warmer
past,	 but	 this	 water	 is	 now	 locked	 into	 polar	 caps,	 where	 it	 sublimates	 rather	 than
melts	and	is	eventually	lost	to	space	as	a	result	of	low	gravity	and	decomposition	by
ultraviolet	 light.	 The	 gas	 giants	 of	 the	 solar	 system	 have	 atmospheres	 composed
mainly	 of	 hydrogen	 and	 helium.	 Methane,	 water,	 hydrogen	 sulfide,	 ammonia,	 and
nitrogen	are	also	present,	making	their	atmospheric	chemistry	a	potentially	interesting
one.	 Not	 enough	 of	 this	 chemistry	 is	 known,	 including	 temperature	 gradients	 in	 the
atmospheres	 of	 these	 gas	 giants,	 to	 preclude	 the	 existence	 of	 life,	 or	 precursors
thereof,	or	to	disprove	it.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

FIGURE	2.5	Top:	Representation	of	an	extrasolar	planet	eclipsing	its	star.	Bottom:	This	 graph	shows
the	drop	in	the	star’s	brightness	as	the	planet	transits	in	front	of	it.	The	star	is	the	sun-like	HD	209458.	(Adapted
from	Doyle,	L.	R.,	H.-J.	Deeg,	and	T.	M.	Brown.	2000.	Searching	for	shadows	of	other	Earths.	Scientific	 American
283:58–65.)

Thus	 a	 planet	 must	 meet	 certain	 orbital	 characteristics	 to	 be	 able	 to	 host	 life.
Suitable	 orbits	 may	 vary	 greatly,	 depending	 on	 the	 surface	 temperature	 of	 the	 star
itself	 and	 the	 age	 of	 the	 star.	 Old,	 first-generation	 stars	 may	 not	 have	 any
accompanying	 planets	 at	 all	 because	 of	 a	 lack	 of	 heavy	 elements	 in	 the	 protostars
that	generated	them.	On	the	other	hand,	young	stars	may	not	have	any	planets	either,
because	 their	 protoplanetary	 discs	 have	 not	 had	 enough	 time	 to	 accrete.
Furthermore,	massive	hot	stars,	known	as	blue	supergiants,	burn	their	fuel	at	a	very

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

high	rate	and	shine	for	only	a	few	million	years.	In	all	likelihood,	this	time	is	too	short
for	planets	to	form	and	life	to	appear.	Stars	with	masses	close	to	that	of	the	Sun	or
less	 (such	 as	 red	 dwarfs)	 can	 sustain	 nuclear	 fusion	 for	 many	 billions	 of	 years	 and
are	thus	good	candidates	for	planetary	systems	harboring	life.	A	planet	hospitable	to
life	 orbiting	 a	 relatively	 cool	 red	 dwarf	 would	 have	 a	 smaller	 orbit	 than	 a
corresponding	 planet	 orbiting	 a	 yellow,	 hotter	 star	 like	 the	 Sun.	 Finally,	 about	 two
thirds	 of	 the	 stars	 exist	 as	 binary	 or	 higher-order	 systems.	 This	 means	 that	 these
stars	 have	 companions,	 all	 orbiting	 a	 common	 center	 of	 mass.	 The	 mutual
gravitational	 pulls	 of	 multiple	 stars	 may	 prevent	 the	 formation	 of	 planets	 from	 dust
discs	 or	 force	 putative	 planets	 into	 complicated	 orbits	 bringing	 them	 too	 close	 and
then	too	far	from	their	stars.	Nevertheless,	it	has	been	calculated	that,	depending	on
the	 masses	 of	 the	 stars	 in	 the	 system	 and	 their	 distance	 from	 each	 other,	 orbits
compatible	with	life	can	exist.	If	the	appearance	of	life	is	a	direct	consequence	of	star
and	planet	formation,	it	is	not	impossible	that	millions	of	planets	in	the	Milky	Way	are
hosts	to	some	form	of	life.

Copyright © 2003. Columbia University Press. All rights reserved.

CONCLUSIONS
At	its	beginning,	the	universe	was	a	very	small	object,	much	smaller	than
the	 size	 of	 a	 single	 proton.	 This	 object,	 however,	 contained	 an	 enormous	 amount	 of
energy.	 Possibly	 through	 a	 quantum	 fluctuation	 allowed	 by	 the	 uncertainty	 principle,
this	object	inflated	at	tremendous	velocity	for	a	very	small	fraction	of	a	second,	during
which	 all	 four	 forces	 of	 nature	 appeared.	 Following	 this	 rapid	 inflation,	 the	 rate	 of
expansion	 decreased	 and	 subatomic	 particles	 were	 created,	 as	 soon	 as	 the
decreasing	temperature	of	the	nascent	universe	allowed	it.	Protons	(hydrogen	nuclei)
stabilized	1/100,000	of	a	second	after	the	Big	Bang,	and	at	100	seconds,	the	nuclei
of	 the	 second	 element	 made	 in	 the	 Big	 Bang,	 helium,	 stabilized.	 It	 took	 an	 extra
400,000	years	for	matter	to	cease	to	exist	as	a	plasma,	the	time	at	which	electrons
were	captured	by	atomic	nuclei.	By	then	the	radius	of	the	universe	had	reached	about
1/100,000	of	its	present	size.
Clouds	of	primeval	hydrogen	and	helium	condensed	into	stars	perhaps	as	early	as
100	million	years	after	the	Big	Bang,	and	stars	started	synthesizing	all	other	elements
found	 today	 in	 the	 universe.	 The	 Sun,	 a	 second-generation	 star	 originating	 from
reprocessed	 supernova	 debris,	 formed	 about	 9	 billion	 years	 after	 the	 Big	 Bang,	 and
its	 protoplanetary	 disc	 then	 started	 accreting	 into	 planets	 and	 their	 satellites.
Atmospheres	 were	 generated	 through	 hot	 (at	 least	 plastic,	 perhaps	 liquid)	 planet
degassing	in	the	case	of	planetary	bodies	close	enough	to	their	star.	At	the	end	of	the
heavy	bombardment	period,	about	3.8	billion	years	ago,	Earth	was	ready	for	life.	But
first,	 to	 understand	 the	 past,	 we	 must	 study	 the	 present	 and	 know	 what	 life	 is	 and
how	 it	 works.	 It	 is	 now	 time	 to	 leave	 the	 realm	 of	 physics	 and	 cosmology	 and	 enter
that	of	biology.

Lurquin, Paul F.. The Origins of Life and the Universe, Columbia University Press, 2003. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/claremont/detail.action?docID=909310.
Created from claremont on 2017-11-13 14:16:15.

