
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
12 sex parties

Former International Monetary Fund head Dominique Strauss-Kahn said he had “only” had 12 sex parties over three years, pushing against perceived exaggerations from prosecutors. Everything in moderation, right? [BBC]


15 percent

Brian Williams was suspended for six months by NBC. I get that this is a story because a television personality was caught lying, but let’s be honest: For all the ink spilled on the matter, only 15 percent of people ages 18 to 29 were able to identify the “NBC Nightly News” anchor in 2013. The nightly news format is not exactly the pulse of the nation anymore. This is inside baseball. [Poynter]

On the other hand …

16 years
After 16 years behind the desk, Jon Stewart announced Tuesday night that he intends to step down from hosting duties of “The Daily Show With Jon Stewart.” His departure date hasn’t been set. Brace yourself, because the entire Web on Wednesday will be a paroxysm of piping-hot takes about Stewart, meaningless aggregations of him saying things about stuff, rampant speculation about his successor, and people complaining about the preceding items. I recommend avoiding the space entirely. [The Wall Street Journal]

18 percent

The New York City subway system was originally designed to bring people living in the outer four boroughs into the core of the city, Manhattan. But intra-borough commutes are on the rise, up 18 percent over a decade. [Regional Plan Association]

32 percent
Only 32 percent of donated hearts are accepted for transplants, down from 44 percent in 1995. About 20,000 Americans “would benefit from a heart transplant” annually. [Bloomberg Business]


115 mph winds
SpaceX on Tuesday delayed the launch of a weather satellite for the second time. The company — run by Elon Musk, the billionaire industrialist who is one more bad day away from super-villainy, if you ask me — called off the launch within 12 minutes of takeoff because of inclement weather, 115 mph winds that were miles higher. [Associated Press]

3,959 victims
The Equal Justice Initiative has released a report compiling 3,959 lynchings that occurred in the American South from 1877 to 1950. [The New York Times]

$118,500

Local governments are “phallible”: The council of Aukland, New Zealand, spent NZ $160,000 — about $118,500 USD — on a set of wire sculptures for a public art installation. The work looks like a penis, and people aren’t happy. As someone who went to an all-boys Catholic high school, allow me to assure you there’s no way this was unintentional. [Hyperallergic]

$850 million
Apple is putting up $850 million toward a solar farm in Monterey, California, with the intention of using the generated power for its operations in the state. The 1,300-acre farm would produce 130 megawatts, enough to power 50,000 homes. [The Verge]

$5.1 billion
Americans put loads of money toward an ill-defined adjective in 2014, with “organic” groceries accounting for some $35 billion in spending. About $5.1 billion of that was on organic dairy, a figure that may go a long way to explain why grocery stores are running out of organic milk. [Bloomberg Business]

Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
$2

Tablet magazine, a Jewish culture site, will now charge $2 for any user to comment on its articles for a day, with bulk deals at $18 for a month of commenting and $180 for a year. [Capital New York]

7.5 percent growth
India posted a spectacular rate of year-on-year growth — 7.5 percent, compared to China’s 7.3 percent — that has raised some eyebrows. Part of the reason for the higher growth rate is changes in the way its government calculates the statistic. [Reuters]

This growth rate estimate leads us to our next number …

13 bullshits

An analysis of swearing in “Nature” has found that uses of profanity in the preeminent scientific journal are few and far between. There have been 48 uses of derivatives of the word “shit,” 13 uses of “bullshit”  and “8 deliberate fucks in roughly 145 years.” [Stuart Cantrill]

40 percent
According to a Rasmussen Reports poll, 40 percent of respondents said they thought “NBC Nightly News” anchor Brian Williams should resign. Williams was caught overstating details from anecdotes about his time reporting in Iraq. That number indicates that he essentially has to save Veronica Corningstone from a bear attack to recover. [Huffington Post]

81 percent

Percentage of Russians who said their opinion of the United States is very or mainly bad. I blame “Taken 3.” [Bloomberg Business]



5,360 subscribers
The number of fixed broadband subscribers in Cuba in 2013. The country has about 11.3 million people, who once wired with broadband might be a huge potential market for Netflix. The company just announced it intends to move into the island nation (though very few there could currently afford the video-streaming service). [Bloomberg Business]

34,000
Soon, 34,000 medical students will be matched to residency programs at hospitals with the National Resident Matching Program algorithm. Last year, 94.4 percent of residents were matched. [FiveThirtyEight]

58,500

The homeless population in New York City shelters this month, up from 52,144 last year. The city plans to allocate more funding and resources to reaching out to the unsheltered homeless. [The New York Times]

191,000 Islamic State fighters
The difference between the low estimate (9,000 fighters, from CNN’s Barbara Starr) and the high estimate (200,000 fighters, from a former chief of staff to the Kurdish president) for the ranks of the Islamic State. That’s a wide range, underlining the difficulty in estimating the true figure. [War on the Rocks]

6.9 million viewers
“Better Call Saul,” the Bob Odenkirk-helmed spinoff from the hit AMC drama “Breaking Bad,” premiered Sunday night to the highest-rated cable debut ever, with 4.4 million viewers among the 18-to-49 demographic and a total of 6.9 million viewers. [Deadline]

Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
4 in 10 North Americans
People aren’t great at getting information from nutritional labels. A Nielsen survey found that 4 in 10 North Americans said they had only partial understanding, at best, of the labels. If you’ll excuse me, I have to get back to getting my daily recommended serving of riboflavin from a sleeve of Oreos. [Fast Company]

48 percent
Percentage of men with college degrees who married women with college degrees in 2005, which is almost double the rate from 1960. This may contribute toward additional educational opportunities for the children of such a couple compared to the children of couples without that level of education. [The Economist]

90 percent decrease

BlackBerry — the Canadian smartphone manufacturer that’s had a steady decrease in smartphone share in recent years — has seen its market value drop more than 90 percent since the heady days of 2008. The company’s home in Waterloo, Ontario, has taken a hit as well. [Fusion]

20,000 videos
Film buff (and late North Korean leader) Kim Jong Il had a collection of 20,000 videos in a private cinema beneath a Pyongyang bunker. He was also reportedly really into “Rambo,” by far the weakest of the Stallone films. I’m more of a “First Blood” guy. [GQ]

30,000 bank accounts
An investigation into HSBC’s Swiss banking arm looked at 30,000 accounts worth a total of $120 billion and found the private bank allegedly conspired with clients to evade taxes, had accounts with international criminals, and had lower standards of compliance than the rest of HSBC. [The Guardian]

$35.6 million
The record for a domain-name sale, for insurance.com, in 2010. That kind of generic domain name fetches a mighty price, and Gary Millin of World Accelerator is sitting on more than 1,000 like it, including email.com, fireman.com and bartender.net. I’m somewhat surprised he still controls toothfairy.com because my understanding is that she is positively loaded. [Motherboard]

$56 million

“The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge Out of Water” took in $56 million at the domestic box office this weekend, according to Paramount. “American Sniper” remained a juggernaut, pulling in $24 million for a total of $282 million over seven weeks. [Deadline]

$300 million
An 1892 piece by Paul Gauguin has set the new record for most expensive painting sold. “When Will You Marry?” was reportedly sold to a museum in Qatar for $300 million. That’ll put that hack Paul Cezanne back in his place. [BBC News]

-$1.2 billion

Eike Batista, a former Brazilian billionaire, is roughly $1.2 billion in the hole. The financier is on trial for insider trading and market manipulation. Becoming a negative billionaire is very hard, but Batista managed it after a series of business failures and alleged financial crimes. [Bloomberg News]

$8 billion
The amount spent annually for New York City residences costing over $5 million. More than half of sales are to shell companies acting on behalf of buyers hoping to avoid scrutiny. [The New York Times]


Sign up for the newsletter now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
0.2 percent
Stand clear of the closing doors, please: They are teeming with bacteria. A new study of the New York City subway found that the system is a thriving ecosystem of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, fragments of anthrax, and general crap. Almost half of the DNA on surfaces did not match any known organism. Only 0.2 percent of the DNA was even human. I don’t care what Harry says the wind chill is, I’m walking tomorrow. [The New York Times]

2.36 percentage points
A study suggests that when women become governors, more women are elected to their states’ legislatures in subsequent years. Four years after states voted a woman into the statehouse, the proportion of their legislators who were women rose by an average of 2.36 percentage points, after controlling for other variables. [Medium]

12 venomous snakes
Australia — where, as I understand it, every living thing is either poisonous, venomous, dangerous, or imported — is establishing a venom library in Melbourne, starting with 12 snakes that have been milked of venom. Researchers will try to develop new anti-venoms with the tissues and samples collected at the facility. [The Guardian]

14 designers

So far 14 designers have signed up for this summer’s New York Men’s Fashion Week. This sounds like a terrible idea, mostly because the middle of July is the worst possible time to wear a suit in the city. [New York]

37 seconds
Troubles began for TransAsia Airlines Flight GE235 just 37 seconds after takeoff on Wednesday, according to investigators. The flight crashed into the Keelung River, just east of Taipei Songshan Airport, soon afterwards, killing at least 35 of the 58 passengers and crew on board. [BBC]

73 percent
Share of Americans who want regulations on privately owned drones, according to a new online poll. I know my rights, government, and once I strap a firework on to that quadcopter it falls under the second amendment, so buzz off. [Reuters]

250,000 license-holders
As part of an annual holiday event, the designers behind the horrible-but-also-delightful game Cards Against Humanity bought an island and gave each of the 250,000 event subscribers a license to one square foot of it. The island — dubbed Hawaii 2 — is in a lake in Maine. Yesterday the designers explained exactly how one buys an island. [Cards Against Humanity]

4 million MAUs

One major measure of participation for social media services is monthly active users (MAUs). So when Apple made changes to iOS 8 that caused Twitter to “lose” 4 million MAUs, it was a big deal for Twitter, which now has 288 million MAUs. [Quartz]

100 million years
New data from the Planck telescope suggests that the first stars began to form about 550 million years after the Big Bang, which is 100 million years later than previously thought. [Press Association]


$1.39 billion in debt

RadioShack has filed for bankruptcy, shocking absolutely no one who has even briefly looked at the changes the American economy has undergone in the past any years. RadioShack has assets of $1.2 billion and $1.39 billion in debt. [CNBC]

Sign up for the newsletter now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
 






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
11 percentage points
Finally, an issue that the polarized left and right can approach —  almost sort of kind of — agreeing on. When asked whether all children should be required to be vaccinated, 76 percent of Democrats, 65 percent of Republicans, and 65 percent of independents said yes. That’s a margin of a mere 11 percentage points! Vaccinate your kids, people. [FiveThirtyEight]

21 percent

An investigation of herbal supplements by the New York State attorney general found that only 21 percent contained any DNA from the advertised plants. The supplements — which investigators purchased at Target, GNC, Walgreens and Walmart — were advertised as containing supplements such as ginseng or ginkgo balboa, but in fact often contained seemingly random vegetable matter. [CBS News]

68 percent approval
NASA continues to enjoy a solid favorability rating across the board, with 68 percent of Americans holding a favorable view of the space agency. NASA spent 0.5 percent of total federal outlays last year. Meanwhile, the IRS — which collects that coin — sits at a measly 45 percent favorability. [Pew Research Center]

99.8 pounds


American per-capita consumption of red meat has steadily declined while consumption of poultry has risen. This year, the average American is projected to consume more poultry (102.4 pounds) than red meat (99.8 pounds) for the first time in at least 50 years. [National Journal]

640 kilograms

Hafthór Björnsson, an Icelandic strongest-man competitor who plays a barbaric character on the popular television show “Game of Thrones,” has broken a millennium-old mythical record after taking five steps while carrying a log that weighs 640 kilograms (1,411 pounds). The 26-year-old is 6′ 9″ and is a living reminder that we should all be pretty thrilled the Vikings stopped doing that raiding thing a little while back. [New York Daily News]

10,000 Picassos
Pablo Picasso’s granddaughter Marina inherited about 10,000 of the artist’s works, and now is preparing to sell some of them privately. Her decision has prompted worries in the art world that she could flood the market and push down prices. I look forward to the day when I can grab one at a thrift shop. [The New York Times]

31,000 mph
NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft was over 126 million miles from former planet Pluto when it sent back its first grainy images of the distant rock. Based on the craft’s rate of travel, New Horizons should be at its closest approach on July 14, which is presumably when it will break the news to Pluto of its demotion to dwarf-planet status. [The Washington Post]

47,000 edits
Bryan Henderson, a Wikipedia editor who goes by the account Giraffedata, is on a solo crusade against a common grammatical error. He has made over 47,000 edits of the world’s largest encyclopedia since 2007, with a singular focus on ridding Wikipedia of the phrase “comprised of,” which he and many others consider to be an invalid English phrase. [Medium]


$15 million

Sony’s reported cost of investigating and responding to the hack that devastated its American film-studio subsidiary Sony Pictures Entertainment late last year. [Gigaom]

$6.3 billion
Staples is buying Office Depot for $6.3 billion in a cash-and-stock deal. If the deal goes through, the only things that will stand between the paper juggernaut and world domination are the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company and the inevitable obsolescence of paper. [Reuters]


Sign up for the newsletter now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.

 
 



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
3.6 percent drop

It’s not often that a 3.6 percent drop in the value of a small hedge fund’s main fund gets the general public’s attention. But Eaglevale Partners LP was co-founded by the son-in-law of Bill and Hillary Clinton, two people who make the papers every now and then. The loss was blamed on the fund’s investments in Greece, which did not rebound as quickly as fund managers expected. [The Wall Street Journal]

22 percent cut
Californians cut water use by 22 percent last December from a year earlier. Their state’s drought is now in its fourth year. [The Associated Press]


25 percent

What happens if you don’t bother filing your taxes? I expected it would involve the fiery steel hammer of the U.S. government coming down from the heavens to annihilate all who dare taunt it, but it’s actually a penalty of up to 25 percent of what’s owed, along with the possibility of another penalty of 25 percent for being late, plus interest. That still sounds terrible. [Bloomberg Business]

55 years


Harper Lee, who 55 years ago published the iconic “To Kill A Mockingbird,” is planning to release a new novel, “Go Set A Watchman,” this July. The book was written in the 1950s, before “Mockingbird,” but is set 20 years later and features Scout’s adult life. [The Guardian]


56 repeal attempts
Yesterday marked the 56th House of Representatives vote to repeal or weaken some or all of the Affordable Care Act. If the previous 55 votes to repeal have set any any precedent, it’s that President Obama won’t consider signing the bill. But hey, who knows, maybe this vote will finally be the one to change his mind. [The New York Times]

61 percent
The median income for men with college degrees in Silicon Valley is 61 percent higher than the median income for college-educated women, a gap of $34,233. The comparable gender wage gap for the country as a whole is 48 percent. [The Wall Street Journal]

77 percent
A poll conducted by the Benenson Strategy Group on behalf of Fusion found that 77 percent of 18- to 34-year-olds couldn’t name either of their two U.S. Senators. In fairness, most Americans don’t know jack about civics, so there’s no reason to pick on the young folks. Moreover, the poll was conducted by telephone, which I’m told is an archaic form of communication that predates the internet. [Fusion]

20,580 euros
French Monopolists, rejoice: To commemorate the 80th anniversary of Monopoly in France, 80 buyers of the board game there will find actual cash in the till. One lucky buyer will get a set in which the 20,580 units of Monopoly money have been replaced with 20,580 euros, worth about $23,600. I assume the French version of the game involves substantially more striking. [Agence France-Presse]

$107,000
That was the maximum salary in the WNBA last season. Diana Taurasi made just under that sum to play for the WNBA’s Phoenix Mercury last summer. She’ll make more this summer by sitting out the WNBA season than she would have by playing it. Her Russian club team, UMMC Ekaterinburg, is paying her more than her Mercury salary just to rest and stay healthy for the Russian pro league, where she is earning nearly $1.5 million this winter. [espnW]

$1.5 billion


Standard & Poor’s will pay $687.5 million to the Justice Department, $687.5 million to a consortium of 19 states and Washington, D.C., and $125 million to the California Public Employees’ Retirement System to settle lawsuits regarding the credit rating company’s overly positive ratings of mortgage-backed securities ahead of the 2008 financial crisis. [Reuters]


Sign up for the newsletter now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.

 
 



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
7-9 hours
The National Sleep Foundation is out with new recommendations for the amount of sleep people should get at different ages. For 18- to 25-year-olds, a new age category, the foundation’s scientific advisory council suggests getting seven to nine hours each night. [The Huffington Post]

10 percent drop
The Obama administration has pushed back the date by which it aims to end chronic homelessness by one year, to 2017. The number of chronically homeless people has dropped 10 percent since 2010. [Associated Press]

16 percent
Following a well-received speech at the Iowa Freedom Summit, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker gained standing among Iowa Republicans, taking 16 percent in a poll of potential Iowa caucus voters. Still, as my colleague Harry Enten explains, chaos is the true champion in the poll. [FiveThirtyEight]

34 percent
Advertisements made up a little more than one-third of the Super Bowl broadcast. The automobile industry alone is estimated to have spent a cumulative $121.5 million shilling cars and their ilk during the NBC telecast. [Bloomberg Business]

$80
Buffalo Bills head coach Rex Ryan knows how to commit to a new gig. Last Friday, the ex-Jets coach got his tattoo of his wife in a Mark Sanchez Jets jersey color-corrected to a tattoo of his wife in a Bills jersey. The incoming coach was charged $80 by a Scottsdale, Arizona, tattoo shop, which is a total bargain, because I paid at least $120 to a guy on St. Mark’s Place to tattoo the damn FiveThirtyEight fox on my neck. [The Wall Street Journal]

676 percent increase
Missy Elliott’s killer performance during the Super Bowl halftime show has boosted popularity of the artist’s songs on digital-download and streaming services. Spotify streams of Elliott’s music — most of which came out in the late 1990s and early 2000s — rose 676 percent after her performance. [The Washington Post]


2,400 members
Iceland will get its first new major temple dedicated to Norse gods since the Viking era as Norse paganism makes a comeback. Membership in an organization that promotes faith in the old gods has tripled to 2,400 — less than 1 percent of the Icelandic population — in the past decade. [Reuters]

$50 million
RadioShack, a vestigial organ of the American economy, is being delisted from the New York Stock Exchange. To remain listed, a company must clear a $50 million threshold with either its 30-trading-day-average global market capitalization or its stockholders’ equity. The Shack has a market cap of $24.19 million and negative shareholders’ equity. Good night, sweet prince. [NYSE via The Wall Street Journal]

114.4 million viewers

Sunday’s Super Bowl was watched by 114.4 million people in the U.S., breaking the record for largest TV audience set by last year’s Super Bowl. [The Hollywood Reporter]

$506 billion
President Obama has announced a plan to tax earnings held offshore by companies such as GE and Microsoft. His proposals — a one-time tax on earnings held abroad, then tax-code changes on future offshore profits — would raise an estimated $506 billion over the next 10 years. [Bloomberg]


Sign up for the newsletter now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading the special Super Bowl edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
4 cents per viewer
With an estimated cost of $4.5 million for a 30-second Super Bowl advertisement and more than 112 million people projected to watch the broadcast, advertisers with a 30-second spot paid about 4 cents per viewer — far more than the 2.5 cents per viewer that advertisers pay for a typical TV spot. [The Washington Post]

$12
Cost of a draft beer at University of Phoenix Stadium. Knowing that, I’m OK with Nate’s decision not to bring me along to the game. [SB Nation]

37 completions

New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady had a banner night (other than those two interceptions), completing 37 of 50 attempted passes and throwing for 328 yards, four touchdowns and the game’s MVP award. [The New York Times]

44 percent
One of the most talked-about TV ads — besides the one in which Nationwide gamed out all the ways to accidentally kill a kid — was the one Budweiser used to distance itself from the namby-pamby world of craft beer and play up its roots as the crappy beer of the common man. This creative direction shouldn’t be shocking for a brewer that recently learned 44 percent of drinkers aged 21 to 27 have never tried Budweiser. [Business Insider]

57.5 percent
The game effectively ended when the Seahawks — with a yard to go for a go-ahead touchdown — threw a pass that the Patriots intercepted. Many slightly-later-on-Sunday-evening quarterbacks second-guessed this play call, suggesting that a run would have been a safer option. During the regular season, 57.5 percent of rushing plays from the opponent’s 1-yard line resulted in a touchdown. [FiveThirtyEight]

71 ads
Perhaps you or someone you know was the person at the party who was there only to take in TV commercials. That’s cool: to each their own. NBC aired 71 unique national ads. [Business Insider]

73-45
Final score of the Puppy Bowl, the annual (sham) event aired by Animal Planet, which I really need to stop gambling on at this point. Cara, a Shih Tzu puppy, was named game MVP. Presumably many specialized vacuums were sold. [IGN]

98 seconds
Remember Ballghazi? As a person who dislikes the New England Patriots, I sure do. It turns out the attempts to reconstruct events are getting rather serious: Investigators are focusing on a 98-second window during which a worker took 24 game-day footballs into a restroom. Has this story gone on too long? Yes. Is the evidence conspiratorial and absurd? Of course. Is it funny, in a juvenile way, that grown adults are arguing over the size of balls? Probably. But is there a long offseason coming up? Damn right, and we’ll all need something to talk about. [NFL.com]


$921
Many speculators use the Super Bowl as an opportunity to make a quick buck. In recent years, people who sold short tickets on secondary sites could profit from an average price fall of $921 in the two weeks prior to the delivery date to buyers. That did not happen this year, leading to substantial chaos on the secondary markets for tickets. [The Atlantic]

$12 billion
Counting all the booze, food, electronics and merchandise, the National Retail Federation estimates Americans spent more than $12 billion on the game. [The Week]


One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
9 communications majors

 It shouldn’t come as too much of a shock that the notoriously taciturn Seattle running back Marshawn Lynch is not among the nine communications majors taking the field in Super Bowl XLIX. Playboy broke down the college majors of every player in this year’s game, and communications came out as the most popular course of study, with nine players, followed by sociology and general studies, with seven players each. [Playboy]

11.8 percent
According to the NFL, concussions decreased by 11.8 percent this season compared to last year, to 202 from 229. [The New York Times]

14 percent rise
The average American office worker spends nine hours each week in meetings or thinking about meetings, up 14 percent from four years ago. [NPR]

25 megabits per second
The Federal Communications Commission raised the bar on the download speeds for “broadband” Internet to 25 megabits per second (Mbps) from 4 Mbps. Under the previous standard, 6.3 percent of households didn’t have broadband. Now 19.4 percent don’t. [Ubergizmo]


$50
John Kerry, the United States secretary of state, owes the city of Boston a $50 fine for failing to shovel his sidewalk. Kerry was in Saudi Arabia — a nation not known for its snow-clearance legislation — as a blizzard struck New England this week. [The Boston Globe]

63.9 percent
The home ownership rate is now at its lowest level since 1994, down to 63.9 percent in the final quarter of 2014. [Los Angeles Times]

96 tons
Amount of dog poop generated in New York City each day. [FiveThirtyEight]

98 percent of scientists
About 98 percent scientists say the public’s lack of knowledge about science is a problem, so why don’t you guys go learn a book or something, geez. [Re/code]

3,000 stories
I thought I was safe in journalism — I’d picked a good field, one that couldn’t be automated. I was wrong. The Associated Press is already automatically generating 3,000 stories each quarter. Right now, those stories are about companies’ quarterly earnings, but who knows when the robots will move on to the dog poop beat. [The Verge]

$1.3 billion
New York City cultural institutions spent $1.3 billion on new construction over the past five years on projects including the expansion of the Queens Museum and the renovation of the fountains at the Met. In 2014, construction expenditures were up 46 percent from 2013 to $208 million. [Crain’s New York]


One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
0.44 Gronks
That’s how much snow Worcester, Massachusetts, got as measured in units of the 6-foot, 6-inch New England Patriots tight end Rob Gronkowski. The record-setting snowfall — which is expressed as “34.5 inches” west of the Connecticut state line — was one of the heaviest from a storm that otherwise disappointed some East Coast residents this week. [MassLive]

17 percent
According to the California Department of Public Health, 17 percent of the state’s high school seniors reported using electronic cigarettes. [Associated Press]

61 tattoos
Anthropologists finally have a handle on each of the 61 tattoos found on the preserved remains of Ötzi the Iceman, who lived around 3,300 BCE. Scientists were at first unable to to see all the tattoos, but now think they’ve mapped them all. Presumably one is a really tasteful tribal band, or perhaps something encouraging like “No Ragrets.” [io9]

66 students
As California continues to battle an outbreak of measles, 66 students of Palm Desert High School, not far from Palm Springs, were told they can’t come to class until Feb. 9 unless they can prove they’ve been immunized against the disease. [Los Angeles Times]

$138
Cab drivers in Seoul, South Korea, have asked passengers to pay a city-approved fine of 150,000 won, or about $138, should they vomit all over the back of a cab. Drivers hope the standard fine will discourage vomiting, which accounts for 42.5 percent of the complaints they file. [Stars and Stripes]

487 bytes
There’s a new record for the smallest fully playable version of computer chess. “BootChess” comes in at a tiny 487 bytes, smashing the previous record, held by “IKZX Chess” of 1983, which used 672 bytes of memory. [Geek.com]


768,000 vehicles
Nissan is recalling 786,000 vehicles — 640,000 of which are in the U.S. — due to problems with electrical shorts in some models and the hood-release cable in others. Those seem like important things, so you should definitely get your Nissan checked. [The Detroit News]

$3.85 billion
Facebook’s earnings are out and they’ve exceeded expectations. The social network’s revenue for the last quarter of 2014 was $3.85 billion, for a grand total of $12.47 billion in revenue last year. The vast majority of that revenue came from advertising, with 70 percent of ad revenue derived from mobile. [Business Insider]

$25 billion
Shareholders of Reynolds American, the company behind Camel cigarettes, approved a deal to take over Lorillard Inc., which sells Newport cigarettes, for $25 billion. Should the deal go through, the subsequent corporation would be the second-largest tobacco company behind Altria Group Inc., which owns Philip Morris. [Associated Press]
One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CLARIFICATION: In the item above about measuring snowfall in Gronkowskis, by Connecticut state line we mean the western border of Connecticut, i.e. the generally agreed up delineation of New England and Patriots’ territory.

