
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
5 percent
Percentage of U.S. adults who claim to be vegetarians in a Gallup poll. According to a “vegetarian calculator” — which seems like it might be arguing from a particular stance, if we’re being honest here — carnivorous Americans each will eat 7,000 animals in their life. I welcome the challenge and relish the opportunity. [USA Today]

12 patients
Cutting-edge medicine and computer science joined forces with altruism last week in San Francisco. Six people gave their kidneys to six recipients in a chain of paired transplants. That’s a difficult logistical — let alone surgical — feat to pull off, and the procedure took two days to accomplish. [Wired]

14 percent
NBA referees flubbed about one in seven reviewed calls in the final minutes of close March games. Buffalo Wild Wings was unavailable for comment. [Bloomberg Business]

$31.32
Private employers spent that amount on compensation per employee hour worked last December. Benefits accounted for $9.60 per employee per hour. [Bureau of Labor Statistics]

50 percent
The Milky Way galaxy may be 50,000 light years longer than previously estimated, which would make it 50 percent bigger than NASA had thought. [Smithsonian]

360 hours
Minimum duration of training for a Louisiana police officer, which seems low. My roommate probably spent more time playing “Destiny” in the past couple of months, and I don’t see the state of Louisiana sending him to a space war. [Gawker]

$92,565
There will be no videos of the trial of alleged Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, and transcripts from court reporters could cost buyers up to $92,565, if the trial is as long as expected. A transcript of the first three days alone will go for about $1,600. [Boston.com]

$172,860
Average bonus to a securities worker on Wall Street last year, according to New York State’s comptroller. [New York Post]


$2.5 million
Annual profit of the Iditarod, which has come under scrutiny for the effect the race has on the dogs that participate. [Quartz] 

$420 million
Annual New York State cap on tax credits for the film industry — incentives for production companies to choose to clog up New York City’s streets instead of those of some lame city such as Toronto. This year, the state government is considering authorizing $25 million for musicians, because the discordance on subway platforms between the Sufjan-wannabes and the steel drummers apparently isn’t enough already. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
13 drinks per week
For men in the U.K., consumption of alcohol peaks at age 25 with 13 drinks per week. This is fantastic news, as it means I haven’t peaked yet, and should move to London. [Wonkblog]

28 percent
For the gaudiest version of its new watch, Apple is using 18-karat gold, which must be three-quarters gold by mass. Apple has patented a way to maintain the 18-karat mass ratio while greatly reducing the volume of gold required by developing a new formulation using low-density ceramics. As a result, Apple gold products can be 75 percent gold by mass, but as little as 28 percent gold by volume. [Slate]

50 percent
Percentage by which Canadians overestimate the inheritance they expect, on average. [Maclean’s]


1,700 employees
After an ill-fated Canadian expansion and a major credit-card hack, retailer Target is feeling the heat financially. The company is laying off 1,700 employees, mostly from its headquarters. [The Huffington Post]

3,000 skeletons
London’s Bedlam burial ground — used from 1569 until at least 1738 — was uncovered during construction of a new train line. Archeologists are excavating about 3,000 skeletons, which is — by my extensive calculations — roughly the number of skeletons in a room containing 3,000 people. [CNN]

 10,000 copies of “The Interview”
South Korean activists plan to drop up to 10,000 copies of the 2014 film “The Interview” into North Korea by balloon. In the comedy, James Franco and Seth Rogen try to kill North Korea supreme leader Kim Jong-Un, so his government is not exactly taking the airdrop plan well. [New York]

£425,000
A delightfully trolly monument by artist Maurizio Cattelan listing England’s soccer failures from 1874 to 1998 has sold for £425,000 (about $640,000) at a London auction. [Herald Scotland]

$7.3 million
Amount Robin Thicke and Pharrell owe the estate of Marvin Gaye due to similarities between their song “Blurred Lines” and Gaye’s song “Got to Give It Up.” As we all know, no musician ever before had influenced any other musician in history, which made this case unprecedented. [Variety]

$14 million
Cost for the state of Louisiana since 1999 to prosecute and defend five men for the murder of a correctional officer. Death-penalty trials can be very, very expensive. [The Marshall Project]

$2 billion
How much Condé Nast, one of the first tenants of New York’s 1 World Trade Center, will pay to occupy the 20th through 41st floors for the duration of the magazine publisher’s 25-year lease. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
2 lethal injections
Here’s a sentence I never expected to write: Texas is almost out of lethal-injection drugs and is desperately trying to find someone to sell it more. The state only has enough for two more state-sanctioned killings, yet has seven scheduled through May 12. [Houston Chronicle]

9 percent
Percentage of American adults who never have sent an email. Presumably they’re all on Snapchat. [FiveThirtyEight]

29 percent
A modest plurality of Americans surveyed by Quinnipiac University said they trusted Fox News the most among network- and cable-news channels. [Politico]

32 percent
About one in three Americans own a firearm or live with someone who does. That, oddly enough, ties for the lowest level in the history of the General Social Survey, which started in the ’70s. [AP]

43 percent
According to the National Association of Realtors — which has an obvious interest in housing sales that has to be acknowledged — only 9 percent of buyers found their home at an open house, down from 16 percent in 2004. As in all things, the internet ruined it: 43 percent of buyers looked online first. Open houses, one realtor suggested, are really just opportunities to recruit clients. [Realtor.com]

72-61
The College of William & Mary, one of only 5 original Division I teams that never have made the NCAA men’s basketball tournament, had its dreams of a bid ruthlessly shredded Monday night when it lost to Northeastern University in the Colonial Athletic Association championship game. Northeastern will go on to March Madness. William & Mary will go on to Paul’s Deli to drink away the loss. This presumably will be the last mention of the school on an ESPN-affiliated website until a similar heartbreak about this time next year. Every effing year. Damn. [ESPN]

189.5 seconds
How long a McDonald’s drive-through order takes today, up from 152 seconds a decade ago, according to an analyst. Those extra 37.5 seconds — due in part to a more-complicated menu — can severely impact sales. [The New York Times]

$17,000
Cost of the most expensive iteration of the Apple Watch, made of gold. Several features of the watch were announced Monday, including Uber integration, 18-hour battery life, and, implicitly, the user’s right to be first against the wall when the revolution comes. [Re/code]


200,000 square feet
Malls, the desiccated temples of a dead consumerist god, have found second lives as companies sell once-fecund retail space to buyers ranging from doctors’ offices to city governments. Austin Community College converted a former JC Penney into 200,000 square feet of instructional space. [The Atlantic]

$300,000 to $600,000
Former Yankee Reggie Jackson will auction the letters that spelled “Yankee Stadium” on the former home of the New York Yankees for an expected total haul of between $300,000 and $600,000. No word on whether Sotheby’s is following the commonly accepted “Wheel of Fortune” rule by charging only for the six vowels. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
1 percent increase
Daylight saving time is not the energy saver it’s intended to be. According to one Indiana study, it results in a 1 percent increase in residential electricity use. This is further evidence, if we needed it, of the futility of humanity attempting to manipulate time itself. [Quartz]

2.2 miles
The length of a troubled streetcar line in Washington, D.C. The city has invested $200 million in a system eventually projected to cost $3 billion, but it has missed several targeted opening dates and might be scuttled. [The Washington Post]

4 inches
Fairbanks, Alaska, finally got some fresh snow a day before the Iditarod dogsled race was due to start. The annual race had to be moved north because snow levels were insufficient along the planned route. [AP]

6.1 percent
Percentage of Albanians who sought an American green card in 2013 through a U.S. State Department immigration lottery called the Diversity Visa Program. [Dadaviz]

30 percent of beaches
In Florida, sea-level rise from climate change threatens 3 in 10 beaches by the year 2100. Meanwhile, the state government banned Department of Environmental Protection employees from using the phrases “climate change” or “global warming ” in official communications. [Miami Herald]

32 percent chance
After finishing its regular season undefeated, the University of Kentucky men’s basketball team has roughly a one-in-three chance of finishing 40-0, based on probabilities calculated before Saturday’s regular-season finale. [FiveThirtyEight]

$180
Two New York City auxiliary police officers were arrested after allegedly ripping off a delivery man of his wallet, his phone and $180 in cash. Courtesy, professionalism, respect. [The New York Times]

227-page report
The International Cycling Union dropped a report about how doping was tolerated for years in cycling, blaming Lance Armstrong. Whatever, right? Here’s the crazy part: In order to smuggle blood into France — without trying to sneak blood bags past border police — one rider was given “two to three units of blood in Madrid and he would then travel to France, where the units would be removed immediately, to be used later throughout the Tour.” The hell? [The New York Times]

9,000 recipes
IBM supercomputer Watson is taking a stab at cooking, factoring in 9,000 recipes from Bon Appétit to understand what kinds of food go well with one another, like black pepper with saffron, paprika with carrot, or boxed macaroni and cheese with all the remaining booze in my house. [Kernel Mag]

$337,209,000
“American Sniper” surpassed “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1” as the top-grossing film of 2014 this past weekend. Local lifestyle writers were heard to say that the latter film “totally had it coming because of that stupid title.” [Box Office Mojo]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
27 percent
In a survey for Match.com — a site which kind of has some skin in the game — 27 percent of respondents said that one of their one-night stands had blossomed into a long-term committed relationship. [Nautilus]

36 kilowatts
The military has a death ray. Other people will call it a “prototype high-energy asset,” but Lockheed Martin made a thing that can blast 30 kilowatts of energy into a car with lasers and where I come from, that’s what you call a death ray. [Vice Motherboard]

51 covers
A member of the Bush family has now been on the cover of Time magazine 51 times. This week it’s Jeb’s turn. It’s worth going through each of the covers, since many of them are darkly funny in retrospect. [Time via Zeke Miller]

103 train cars
A train transporting 103 cars worth of crude oil caught fire in rural Illinois and forced the evacuation of everyone within a mile radius. [Associated Press]

3,000 feet
Harrison Ford — who is apparently an accomplished pilot? — crash-landed his vintage plane on a golf course on Thursday, smoothly taking the World War II-era aircraft down 3,000 feet, gracefully hitting only one tree, and landing on the fairway. The national treasure was a little beaten up but otherwise fine. [Associated Press]

3,500 labor hours
Amount of work that went into assembling Katy Perry’s Super Bowl halftime show lion. [Sports Illustrated]

46,000 tweeters
At least 46,000 Twitter accounts supported the Islamic State on the social messaging service from September to December last year. [The Washington Post]

$2.12 million
Better ingredients, better pizza — loads of wage theft. A New York City Papa John’s franchisee was ordered to pay $2.12 million over hundreds of wage-theft violations involving delivery drivers. [Gothamist]

$40 million
That stupid mobile game with the Kate Upton ads spent $40 million on the four-month campaign. It seems to have paid off: The makers of “Game of War” say they’re pulling in $1 million per day. [Bloomberg Business]

$100 million
Lincoln Center’s Avery Fisher Hall, where the New York Philharmonic plays, will be renamed after David Geffen following a $100 million donation from the entertainment executive. [The New York Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
11 companies
Paying taxes is just a thing you have to do, really. Unless you’re one of the 11 profitable companies on the S&P 500 that didn’t pay any income tax in 2014. Two of them are Darden Restaurants and Goodyear Tire & Rubber. [USA Today]

54 percent
There’s a movement to cut the U.S. prison population in half by reducing sentences and changing parole rules. The minor issue here? Fifty-four percent of inmates in state prisons are in for violent crimes. It’s not too hard to persuade someone that some nonviolent drug offenders could get cut loose early, but violent offenders? That’s kind of a tough sell for “Cut50” advocates. [The Marshall Project]

60 percent of deaths
In New York City, 15 percent of streets account for 60 percent of pedestrian deaths. [Associated Press]

62 percent of BuzzFeed
BuzzFeed gets 62 percent of the images in its posts from just 25 online sources. Tumblr came out on top, followed by Instagram. [Priceonomics]

3,511 feet cubed
How big would a single building need to be to cram all of humanity — some 7.3 billion people — inside it? About 1.07 kilometers cubed, or 3,511 feet cubed. It’d take up basically all of NoHo and be 29 percent taller than the Burj Khalifa. [Wait But Why]

$50,000
John Sylvan, the inventor of the K-Cup coffee system, sold his stake in Keurig Green Mountain for $50,000 in 1997. The coffee pod company now makes $4.7 billion in revenue, and Sylvan says he now regrets ever inventing the K-Cup in the first place because the system is so wasteful. [The Atlantic]

3.3 million viewers
Fox News averaged the most viewers of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s address to the U.S. Congress on Tuesday. Second place went to CNN, which held an average of slightly more than 1 million viewers. The really interesting number here? A mere 558,000 of Fox News’ viewers were ages 25 to 54, and for some reason I’m doubting the rest of them were teens who love the news network. [TV By The Numbers]

$16.6 million
Remember “Blurred Lines”? Man that song sucked. There’s a big lawsuit over it, and now we’ve learned that it made $16.6 million. [The Wrap]

$1.93 billion
Etsy — an e-commerce site that allows individual (typically twee) producers to sell their (often artisanal) wares — is filing for an initial public offering. Sales last year through the site grossed 1.93 billion handcrafted, locally sourced and responsibly grown dollars. [Mashable]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
2 probes
Thanks to a DARPA research project, a paralyzed woman was able to control a simulated F-35 fighter jet through two probes connected to her brain. [The Washington Post]

9.9 percent
Per capita share of spending on food in 2013, down from 17.5 percent in 1960. [NPR]

21 “Navajo-inspired” objects
Stores that cater explicitly to a hipster sensibility are suffering a decline, in part because you can now get most of their styles at Wal-Mart. So they’re trying to hold onto their market by being edgy with often unfortunate results — see American Apparel’s desperately sexualized advertising, or Urban Outfitter’s 21 unique “Navajo-inspired” items for sale. The latter prompted a cease-and-desist letter from the Navajo Nation. [Racked]

88 percent
In Ferguson, Missouri, 88 percent of documented incidents of police use of force between 2012 and 2014 were against African-Americans, according to a report from the Justice Department. [The New York Times]

100 people
Approximate number of people who knew former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s personal email address. The presumed 2016 Democratic frontrunner is taking heat for not using her federal government email account when she worked at the State Department. In fairness, nothing really says “vestigial form of communication” quite like “federal government email account.” [Associated Press]

271 paintings
Nine people were arrested in Spain after allegedly participating in a forgery ring that produced faux Picassos and more. Some 271 frauds were seized, but the sad clown painting I found in a thrift store is still legit as far as I can tell. [Artnet]

700 koalas
Stop reading this and skip to the next one. Australia killed 700 koalas to deal with overpopulation issues. I’m so sorry. I really didn’t want to be the one who broke this to you. But Elon Musk didn’t give any absurd valuation prediction this week so I am short on news. Are you happy, Elon Musk? You could have stopped this just by saying something ludicrous about the hyperloop. I will never not write about Elon Musk saying something ludicrous about the hyperloop. [Australian Broadcasting Company]

$450,000
The owner of a revenge-porn website — where intimate photographs were posted without consent and their subjects extorted for money in order to secure their removal — was ordered to pay $450,000 to a plaintiff who is a minor. [Ars Technica]

$1.5 million
Sum of political donations from the Pizza Industrial Complex in the 2012 and 2014 election cycles. The vast majority went to the GOP. Let’s be real, this strategy seems off: If Big Pizza really wants to position itself for growth it’ll start throwing big bucks behind marijuana legalization. [Bloomberg Business]

$94 million
Sweet Briar College, a women’s liberal arts school in Virginia, will stop instruction at the end of the semester due to financial difficulties. It will use the remainder of its $94 million endowment to ease the transition process, getting employees severance and remaining technically open so enrolled students can complete their degrees with credit from other colleges. [Business Insider]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
1 in 10
The proportion of biology Ph.D.s who will get a job in academia. The demand for people with doctorates just doesn’t come close to the available supply. [The Hechinger Report]

4.0
The “Glass Ceiling Index” for companies listed on the S&P 1500, where are four times as many CEOs named James, Robert, John or William as there are women in the top spot. [The Upshot]

5 p.m.
The best time to post something to Instagram (ideally also on a Wednesday) to get hella likes. Another good time is 2 a.m., presumably to grab those late left-coast likes and the night owls of the East. [The Huffington Post]

10 percent
The way we rate hospitals is inconsistent, and makes it harder to determine true quality. A study compared four national hospital-rating systems and found 844 hospitals that were considered “high-performing” on at least one list. The issue? Only 10 percent of those hospitals were deemed high performers on any of the other lists. [Health Affairs, via Adrianna McIntyre]

45 percent
Come, visit beautiful Russia. Compared to last year, the average price of a hotel room in the country fell by $80 for users of the dollar, a 45 percent drop. This is because Russia’s currency is crashing. [Wonkblog]

63 percent lower
The best thing I personally do for my health is to take a regular schvitz at the Russian-Turkish Baths, a new study has found. The risk of cardiovascular death decreased by as much as 63 percent in men who went to the sauna often, compared to men who went only once a week. [The Wall Street Journal]

8,000 years
Earth has a weird rock following it around called 3753 Cruithne. This “quasi-orbital satellite” travels through space like a drunk and will be closest to us in about 2,750 years. Luckily, in 8,000 years or so it’ll get too close to Venus and may finally take the hint that we’re in a pretty serious relationship with the Moon and buzz off. [Discover Magazine]

73 million
Remember when we were all talking about that dress last week? I don’t, I was still pretty obsessed with the llamas. But many people on Tumblr were — the original image post got a whopping 73 million pageviews according to the Tumblr staff. [Tumblr]

$200 million
How much New York Daily News owner Mort Zuckerman is hoping to sell the paper for. A list of suitors is queuing up, one of whom is former mayoral candidate and the man behind the greatest Christmas card of all time John Catsimatidis. (Make sure to click through the link, because if the Post was put on this earth to do one thing it’s to throw shade at the Daily News.) [New York Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
2 missiles
North Korea launched 2 missiles into the ocean over the weekend because it was ticked about U.S.-South Korea war games. [AP]

14 seconds
Ronda Rousey defeated Cat Zingano in a mere 14 seconds at UFC 184, setting a new record for the fastest match in the fighting league. [AP]

21 retired numbers
The New York Yankees retire a lot of players’ jersey numbers: 18 so far, with three more to come soon. While they won’t ever run out of numbers, it’s still going to be kind of inconvenient to get triple digits on a uniform. [The New York Times]

63 percent
Percentage of millennial-age Republicans who support the legalization of marijuana. That’s less than the 77 percent of millennial Democrats who support legal weed, but still high compared to other age groups within the GOP. [The Washington Post]

$10,802
Amount of government funds allegedly used by Rep. Aaron Schock of Illinois to pay for a private flight to a Minnesota Vikings-Chicago Bears game in November. Schock is under scrutiny for allegedly spending taxpayer funds for personal uses. [Chicago Sun-Times]

13,000 workers
Number of employees of Aetna, the heath insurance giant, who have taken the company’s free yoga classes. [The New York Times]

38,660 pounds
Quantity of retail marijuana sold in the first year of legalization in Colorado, in addition to 109,578 pounds of medical marijuana. [The Hill]

40,000 years ago
Approximately when the Neanderthals disappeared from Europe. New evidence suggests that Homo sapiens sapiens was aided by trained wolves, the ancestors of modern dogs, in conquering them. This would place the domestication of dogs — man’s greatest achievement, let’s be real here — a lot earlier that previously thought. [The Guardian]

50,000 marchers
Approximate turnout to demonstrations in Moscow in support of recently killed opposition leader Boris Nemtsov. [The New York Times]

$14.3 billion
Amount of unpaid child support in 2011 in the U.S. alone. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
1 hour
Two escaped llamas evaded capture in a Phoenix-area retirement community for about an hour yesterday. One was lassoed from a truck. America is great. [Associated Press]

3-2
The FCC voted 3-2 to prevent telecom companies from prioritizing web traffic to content providers who are willing to pay for faster speeds. Long story short, that person you know with opinions about “net neutrality” is probably pretty giddy right now. [Ars Technica]

5 miles
A test track for the Hyperloop — a high-speed train that’s the brainchild of billionaire industrialist and potential creator of Ultron Elon Musk — is planned for Quay Valley in California. [Wired]

6 months
The Huffington Post is out with an in-depth look at what really went on behind the scenes at “Pimp My Ride,” the hit MTV show from the 2000s. As it turns out, life wasn’t awesome for guests on the show. For instance, while it may have seemed like the eponymous rides were in the shop for a weekend at most, some cars were worked on for 6 to 7 months. [Huffington Post]

7 percent
The breakfast battlefield — which apparently is a thing — is in flux. Sales of eggs were up 7 percent last year, which hurt cereal sales. Kellogg spends more than $1 billion on advertising, but 19 of its top 25 cereals saw drops in sales last year. Carbs are bad, folks. [Bloomberg Business]

15 percent
Percentage of people who, in a survey conducted for the 92nd Street Y, said they, themselves, might be a genius. Dubious. [Fast Company]

18 weed vending machines
The future has arrived: Seattle just got its first cannabis vending machine, joining Arizona, California and Colorado, which have similar devices. [Good Magazine]

39 percent
Almost 40 percent of the men’s underwear market is boxer briefs, a class of shorts that has eclipsed both boxers and briefs. [Bloomberg Business]

67 percent
According to a new study out of Australia, 67 percent of smokers will die from a smoking-derived illness. [Washington Post]

14,000 workers
A labor dispute between 14,000 longshoremen and shipping companies ended recently, following months of slowdowns at west coast ports. About 90 percent of consumer goods in the U.S. were at one point transported on a container ship. [The Atlantic]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
