
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Today we’re focused on the news in Charleston, South Carolina, where nine people were killed by a white man at a historically black church Wednesday night. The alleged shooter was captured Thursday, and his actions are being investigated as a hate crime. 
5

South Carolina is one of the five remaining states without a state-level hate crime law. The other four are Arkansas, Wyoming, Georgia and Michigan. [Think Progress]

9

Charleston’s Post and Courier has profiles of the nine victims. Read about their lives: 
Cynthia Hurd
Susie Jackson
Ethel Lance
Rev. Depayne Middleton-Doctor
Rev. Clementa Pinckney
Tywanza Sanders
 Rev. Daniel L. Simmons
Rev. Sharonda Coleman-Singleton
Myra Thompson

12 times

In the United States, black Americans are killed at 12 times the rate of people who live in other developed countries. What’s a developed country? The definition includes places such as Argentina, Cuba, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia that have high homicide rates. But for black Americans, the homicide rate is 19.4 deaths per year per 100,000 population. [FiveThirtyEight]


13 mass murders
There have been “13 mass murders at a house of worship since the Birmingham, Ala., bombing in 1963,” according to Sarah Pulliam Bailey at The Washington Post. [The Washington Post]

14 times

The number of times President Obama has had to make a statement about a shooting attack, by CBS White House correspondent Mark Knoller’s reckoning. [@MarkKnoller]



19 hate groups

According to the Southern Poverty Law Center, South Carolina was home to 19 of America’s 784 active hate groups in 2014. [SPLC]

$30


The Post and Courier ran an ad for a gun show where “$30 Gets You Everything” on the front page Thursday, alongside coverage of the church killings. The paper has since apologized. [Talking Points Memo]



33
According to the FBI, there were 51 reported hate crimes in South Carolina in 2013, 33 of which were motivated by race. According to both the FBI’s and the Southern Poverty Law Center’s estimations, South Carolina is below the national average rate for reported hate crimes when you factor in population. My colleague Carl Bialik looked at the complicated nature of hate-crime statistics. [FiveThirtyEight]



49 percent
A survey from the Pew Research Center in 2013 found that 49 percent of whites saw no systemic racism towards black Americans at all. To break it down further, those 49 percent said they did not think blacks were treated less fairly in each of seven categories, including dealing with cops, the court system, jobs, restaurants, schools, health care and elections. [The Washington Post]


193rd anniversary



The Emanuel AME Church has a long history as an important site in the struggle for black Americans’ rights. Tuesday, the day before the killing, was the 193rd anniversary of a planned slave revolt coordinated by one of church’s founders, Denmark Vesey. [NPR]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
13 percent
A report by the Institute of Economics and Peace estimates that conflicts around the world reduced global GDP by 13 percent. So cut it out, people, there’s money to make here. Boom, world peace. [BBC]


28.5 percent

Austerity measures in Greece have had an incredible effect. Food consumption spending, for example, is down 28.5 percent in the indebted nation. [The Guardian via @KathViner]

40 percent
Births to unwed mothers accounted for 40 percent of U.S. births in 2014, down from 41 percent in 2013 — the first drop since the 1990s. Part of this decline is due to people waiting longer to have children (older mothers are more likely to be married). The downward trend also coincides with a lower birthrate overall during the recession. [Pew Research Center]

234 waivers
The drone industry is rapidly expanding, as companies begin to scoop up waivers from the FAA to fly drones for commercial purposes. In the first four months of 2015, 234 such waivers were granted, and 186 of those were in April alone. [The Los Angeles Times]



$69,000


Magazine covers featuring Caitlyn Jenner that were remixed with glitter and paint by Miley Cyrus raised $69,000 for AIDS research at an auction. [Reuters]


198,000 millionaires

India is granting new members to the Two Comma Club faster than anyone else, with the number of millionaires there rising 26 percent in one year. There are 14.6 million people on earth worth $1 million or more. [Associated Press]

$2 million

“Shenmue 3” is the fastest game to raise $2 million on Kickstarter. It had raised over $3 million as of Thursday morning. The game is a long-awaited followup to a series of open-world action role-playing games. “Shenmue 2” came out 14 years ago. [Kotaku]

$50 million

Following the detection of illegal levels of lead by India’s food safety panel, Nestle India will destroy $50 million worth of Maggi noodles. The instant noodles were also found to have MSG, an ingredient that wasn’t listed on the food’s label. [Yahoo! News]

$100 million
The FCC slammed AT&T with a $100 million fine for allegedly slowing the mobile data of customers with unlimited plans. Actually, the fine isn’t really for slowing users down — which raised tens of thousands of complaints from customers — but for doing it sneakily. AT&T will “vigorously dispute” all this. [Bloomberg]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
29 percent

It takes a lot of energy to pump water from the Colorado River across the Arizona wilderness and to the places where — for some reason — people decided to live, like in the middle of the desert in Phoenix and Tucson. The Navajo Generating Station pumps water 336 miles to those cities, but it’s also powered by 15 tons of coal per minute and singlehandedly accounts for 29 percent of the carbon emissions Arizona creates from generating energy. [ProPublica]

31 percent
A Suffolk University poll suggests that Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders may be able to take a solid chunk of support from former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Nearly a third of New Hampshire respondents (31 percent) said they’d support Sanders if the election were held that day. [NH 1]


105-97


The Golden State Warriors won the NBA Championship on Tuesday night, defeating the Cleveland Cavaliers in Game 6 of the finals. Andre Iguodala technically won the NBA Finals MVP, but let’s be real: It was definitely LeBron James who deserved it. [ESPN]


1,340 grenade fuses


In what was functionally a major arms deal, the owner of Whisper Tech, an explosives training company in Alabama, has pleaded guilty to illegally selling 1,340 M228 grenade fuses to an unlicensed individual only described as “J.C.” [The Birmingham News]


$12,000
Are you an ostentatious rich guy obsessed with the obsolete metonymy of a financial industry that mainly operates in New Jersey, a fiber optic cable and other places besides Wall Street? Well, have I got good news for you! For a starting bid of $12,000, you can buy the New York vanity license plate “WALL ST” on eBay. Nobody appears to have bid $12,000 for it at the time of publication. [The Huffington Post]


167,805 deaths
Smoking kills, study finds. Well, it’s actually a little bigger than that. Researchers at the American Cancer Society — known all around the world for their profound anti-cancer bias — estimated that 167,805 of the 345,962 cancer deaths in 2011 were associated with smoking. That’s a little less than half. [Reuters]

$1.8 million

Helmut Anscheringer was charged by the SEC with allegedly parlaying information from an insider source into $1.8 million. The source supposedly told Anscheringer that Apple was going to buy AuthenTec, so Anscheringer allegedly bought a lot of AuthenTec stock, and then the stock rose 60 percent when Apple bought it. [CNBC]

8.1 million people
That was the audience for HBO’s “Game of Thrones” finale on Sunday, a record for the show. This season may be over, but what is dead will never die and will rise harder and stronger sometime next year. [The New York Times]


$43 million
The main objective of a legislature is, as we all know, looking really good. To that end, Nigeria’s National Assembly will divvy up $43 million to spend specifically on clothes. [Quartz]


 $6.2 billion

Estimated cost to the food industry over two decades of a new ban on trans fats, the hydrogenated oils that are pretty much across the board bad in every conceivable way for the human body. The estimated aggregate benefit of the move will be about $140 billion, mostly from reduced health care spending. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 error per patient per day
The rate at which U.S. hospitals make mistakes with medication, according to the Institute of Medicine. Anybody who can find a way to reduce that by even a small fraction would save the medical system a lot of money and patients a lot of negative results. [Quartz]


2-0

The Chicago Blackhawks defeated the Tampa Bay Lightening last night 2-0 at home to win the Stanley Cup, prompting thousands across the United States to exclaim in one voice “Wait, seriously, hockey is still on? In June?” [ESPN]

4 percent growth


The promised cornerstone of a Jeb Bush presidency. Bush announced his bid for the GOP nomination on Monday, pledging a 4 percent annual economic growth rate. Get ready to hear that number a bunch. [POLITICO]


-35 percentage points


Donald Trump’s net favorability rating among Republicans, according to a new poll. Trump is, you know, the guy reportedly planning to run for president as a Republican. I’m certain his bid will go great. [Monmouth University]



175 stores
The Gap is struggling, and will shutter 175 stores and lay off 250 employees at its headquarters. Meanwhile, Old Navy — which Gap owns – is doing just dandy. [Quartz]


400 doctors per year
About 400 of Puerto Rico’s 11,000 doctors leave the territory every year, a major drain on the medical system. [The Washington Post]


35,000 government employees

India’s government is holding a Yoga Day this Sunday that may end up in the Guinness Book of World Records. About 35,000 government employees, students and other people are expected to participate. [The New York Times]

$1.7 billion 
That was the revenue of Supercell — the Finnish studio behind mobile freemium game “Clash of Clans” — in 2014, up from $555 million the year before. Most of that money is derived from in-app purchases by its most devoted customers. (You know, like that “South Park” episode.) [ESPN]

$1.9 billion
CVS is buying Target’s pharmacy business, about 1,660 pharmacies which will continue to be operated within Target stores, for $1.9 billion. [Nasdaq]


$42 billion

The nation’s top heath insurers are kicking the tires on several mergers in order to stay competitive. UnitedHealth (the largest insurer) is trying to take over Aetna (the third-largest insurer) for somewhere in the neighborhood of $42 billion, and in response Anthem (the second-largest insurer) is trying to buy Cigna (the fifth-largest insurer). It’s all coming together as the equivalent of a paperwork-heavy summer camp movie ending. All this leaves Humana (the fourth-largest insurer) as the fifth wheel, or as I like to call it, the awesome unicycle who is doing just fine on his own thank you very much. [The Wall Street Journal]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (June 16, 11:25 a.m.): A previous version of this article incorrectly called Humana the third-largest insurer in the U.S. Humana is the fourth-largest insurer.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
0.267 percent

The American Dream is still alive: The Iowa Supreme Court ruled Friday that people have a right to be drunk on their front porch. The case revolved around a woman from Waterloo, Iowa, who was arrested in 2013 for being drunk in public. She had a blood alcohol content of 0.267 percent. But in the end freedom prevailed, the court ruled her front porch wasn’t public, and America breathed a sigh of relief. [Des Moines Register]

$15
Los Angeles became the largest city in the United States to plan on a $15 minimum wage after Mayor Eric Garcetti signed an ordinance Saturday instituting scheduled increases over the next several years. The wage jumps to $10.50 next July, then up to $15 over the course of four annual bumps. Oh, to be New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio’s stress ball this week. [Yahoo News]


30 days
You can now file complaints about your Internet service provider’s speed to the FCC! (Thanks to the agency’s newly in effect net neutrality rules.) The best part: Your ISP has to respond to your complaints within 30 days. Be sure to check your Internet speeds early and often. [Ars Technica]


60 percent


Part of the point of a corporate Twitter account is to provide service to customers — at least in theory. But only about 20 percent of questions posed to companies through Twitter get a response, compared to about 60 percent on Facebook. [Mashable]


150 cases
Schools reopened in South Korea on Monday even as the MERS outbreak there continued. The Health Ministry reported five new cases and another death, bringing those totals to 150 and 16, respectively. [Reuters]

210 days dark
The Philae lander, which the European Space Agency sent to land on a comet last year, has come back to life and is sending data back to its mothership, the Rosetta orbiter. The solar-powered lander went dark on Nov. 15 after landing on Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko. But Philae is awake again and has sent 300 data packets so far. [ESA]


$1.5 million
Yeah, the Silk Road went down in flames, but people are still really into buying drugs on the Internet. It’s huge money. Medibuds, which sells top-notch pot over the Internet, is on pace to pull in $1.5 million in 2015 (assuming everyone’s doors stay on their hinges, if you know what I mean). [The Daily Dot]


 $12 million

If you hang out in hip neighborhoods, you’re probably seeing a lot more Narragansett beer around. Since the Rhode Island lager was adopted by the hipster crowd, the Narragansett beer company’s revenues have jumped, from $100,000 in 2005 to $12 million last year. The story of what happens when your failing beer company wins the hipster lottery is a great read. [Bloomberg]

14 million people


The breach of Office of Personnel Management data continues to get worse and worse, with the estimate of those affected now up to about 14 million. If the number is that high, it likely means that family members of government employees were also affected. [The Atlantic]


$511.8 million

“Jurassic World” crushed it at the box office over the weekend, earning $511.8 million worldwide. That is, by some (inflation unadjusted) reckonings a record of sorts. [The Hollywood Reporter]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 year
Virgin Management, part of Richard Branson’s Virgin Group conglomerate, announced it will allow up to one year of paid leave for new parents. [Business Insider]

1 in 109
Percentage of Americans with a unisex name, according to a recent FiveThirtyEight analysis. The most common unisex name is Casey, as in the lesser Affleck. [FiveThirtyEight]

2.6 percent
Energy consumption in China grew a mere 2.6 percent in 2014. That slowing growth has had major impacts on the energy market this year. [Bloomberg]


21.5 inches by 13.5 inches by 7.5 inches 

The new recommended optimal size for a carry-on bag, according to the International Air Transport Association, a global airline group. That’s smaller than the maximum bag allowed on Delta or American, and the recommendation could compel some airlines to lower their carry-on size limits. Luckily, I am broke and have very little shame, so I fly Spirit, and look forward to another opportunity to make my flying experience just a little bit worse. [Chicago Tribune]

38 percent more

Birchbox is a service that sends out samples of beauty products to subscribers to try before they commit to full-size products. The strategy seems to work: Consumers spend 38 percent more on the Birchbox site after subscribing. But two of the company’s competitors, Sephora and Ulta, have also seen increased sales among Birchbox subscribers — to the tune of 5 percent and 6 percent, respectively. [Bloomberg]


49 percent

The U.S. wants to host the Olympics in 2024. Why, I have absolutely no idea. But the U.S. Olympic Committee is into it, so why not let them have their fun before they lose the bid to Qatar or something. The committee selected Boston as the candidate for host city. They apparently did not inquire whether the great state of Massachusetts was in fact interested in such a tourist trap: 49 percent of the commonwealth’s residents oppose having the Olympics in Boston, and just 39 percent support the idea. [The Boston Globe]


56 percent
Percentage of Americans who think the U.S. should use military action if another member of NATO is attacked by Russia. I thought that guarantee was the main point of bothering to join NATO? [Pew Research Center]


$816,000

How much Cleveland Cavaliers guard Matthew Dellavedova, who had a breakout performance in Tuesday night’s game against the Golden State Warriors, is being paid this season. Dellavedova has the lowest salary of any player in the NBA Finals. [ESPN]

20 million

Earlier this week, Apple formally entered the streaming music market, banking on its consistent connection to consumers and strong connection to the music industry. In response to the shot across its bow, the streaming music service Spotify announced Wednesday that it had accumulated 20 million paid subscribers — up from 10 million a year ago — and had wrapped up a funding round valuing the company at $8.5 billion. [Re/code]

$377 million
Tranquilizers previously were not covered by Medicare’s prescription drug program, but in 2013 they were — and Medicare spent $377 million on benzodiazepines. That’s roughly 40 million prescriptions for benzos. [ProPublica]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.











--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 voter
A single voter showed up to a Rick Santorum campaign stop in Iowa Monday — not a great sign for the former Republican senator turned neologism turned presidential aspirant. [Politico]

13th career start
San Francisco Giants pitcher Chris Heston threw a no-hitter in his 13th career start in the major leagues, against the New York Mets. The Giants won 5-0. [Associated Press]


21-point swing
A new Pew survey found that 57 percent of U.S. adults favor letting gay and lesbian couples legally marry, up from 36 percent in 2005. [Pew Center for the People and the Press]


41 percent

Democratic presidential contender Bernie Sanders got 41 percent of the vote in a meaningless straw poll at the Wisconsin Democratic Convention. According to my colleague Harry Enten, this is essentially an insignificant digit, so let’s all do our best to get the word out about how this doesn’t mean the senator from Vermont has anything resembling momentum. [FiveThirtyEight]


45 percent

Markets are bracing for an oversupply of cotton, as demand in China for imports of the raw material is projected to drop 45 percent this year. China has accumulated cotton stockpiles since 2011 and this year intends to pare down the size of those stockpiles, which means fewer imports. [The Wall Street Journal]

$607

A FIFA-produced Sepp Blatter biopic made $607 in its 10-theater U.S. premiere, far short of its $29 million budget. It made $319 on Friday and $288 on Saturday, showing a clear cratering of momentum that could be a death knell for the inspiring tale of a humble boy who became a bargain-bin Bond villain. [Los Angeles Times]


2,200 liberations
About 2,200 piglets escaped from a truck in Ohio Tuesday after the truck crashed. About 1,500 of them have been recaptured, but let’s hope Colin “The Forger” Blythe’s handiwork will get the rest of the liberated swine through to Spain. [Fox 19]

12,200 not-yet-dead Americans


An estimate from the Social Security Administration says that about 12,200 living Americans are inaccurately declared dead by the agency every year due to keystroke errors. Life-after-official-death for these people is tough, mostly because it becomes very difficult to do just about anything involving finances. [Priceonomics] 


$750,000


Prosecutors are investigating what happened to $750,000 FIFA sent to aid the earthquake relief effort in Haiti. The money went through accounts controlled by FIFA Vice President Jack Warner, who is wanted on soccer-related corruption and bribery charges. Nobody knows exactly what happened to the money, but I have a few ideas. [BBC]


1.3 million
The Great Recession led to a big drop in construction jobs in the U.S., and the field still hasn’t recovered. About 2.3 million jobs disappeared from the sector’s peak employment in 2006 to its nadir in 2011, and 1.3 million are still missing. [The Wall Street Journal]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.











--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 additional satisfying sexual encounter per month
Flibanserin is a pharmaceutical designed to improve libido in women, and its manufacturer is currently seeking FDA approval. Many news reports on the drug have inaccurately compared it to Viagra, but there are totally different biological logistics going on there. How much of a difference does the drug make? In clinical trials, flibanserin was reportedly linked to 1 additional satisfying sexual encounter per month. [Smithsonian Magazine]


$1.50
Eggs are going to get more expensive in the U.S. because of an avian flu that is wiping out hens. It’s already come to rationing at a chain of supermarkets in Texas. From a wholesale angle, the cost of a dozen liquid eggs has jumped from $0.63 to about $1.50 since April. [The Washington Post]


7 women

Sunday was a huge night for women at the Tony awards, a morning-after analysis found, with seven women scoring eight of 17 awards in the non-acting categories, the highest-ever share. [FiveThirtyEight]


$14.99

Apple announced its new streaming music service Monday, which will cost $9.99 per month or $14.99 per month for a family plan that covers up to six listeners. Apple is entering a crowded market and wasn’t able to compete with existing streaming services on price, but the company’s direct link with mobile consumers may be its competitive advantage. [The Verge] 

$20

No one told me life was gonna be this way: Warner Bros. reportedly sent out a $20 settlement demand to a person who used the bittorrent system to share an episode of “Friends.” The episode in question was “The One with Five Steaks and an Eggplant” and aired in October of 1995. The policy of sending out settlement offers is about two years old and is designed to discourage future pirates. [TorrentFreak]

73 employees
A new report finds the TSA overlooked 73 airline employees with ties to terrorism and also clearance badges. Great job, TSA! [NBC News]

99.2 percent

The U.S. Women’s National Team beat Australia Monday night in the squad’s first game in the World Cup. FiveThirtyEight’s model now gives the U.S. a 99.2 percent chance to advance out of the group stage and into the knockout rounds. [FiveThirtyEight]


$200,000-$300,000
The KITT car from the series “Knight Rider” is up for sale at auction and is expected to go for between $200,000 and $300,000. Rich people who like cars from other old pieces of media may also be interested in such attractions as that car from the movie “Grease” or that other car from “Dukes of Hazzard.” [The Wrap]


5.58 million barrels per day

The low price of petroleum is hitting U.S. drillers in North Dakota and Texas, with shale output dropping 1.3 percent this month. Output is forecast to drop further by July, according to the Energy Information Administration. [Bloomberg]

$175 million
Jay Faison, a North Carolina-based entrepreneur, announced he will commit $175 million to a campaign to get the Republican Party to change its — “skeptical,” as Politico puts it — views on climate change and green energy. There are probably worse ways to destroy $175 million than charging windmills. [Politico]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
2:26.65

American Pharoah, the horse, won the Belmont Stakes on Saturday in under two and a half minutes, securing a Triple Crown win. He is the 12th horse to do so. Good for him! People are very happy for the horse. His descendants will now be more expensive to procure than they would have been otherwise. [CNN]

3 years
Chris Dodd was elected to a three-year contract extension as the head of the Motion Picture Association of America. [The New York Times]


12 percent drop
A survey by the Associated Press found a 12 percent decrease in abortions across 45 states since 2010. [Associated Press]


20th 

Serena Williams won the French Open on Saturday, the 20th Grand Slam title of her career. [ESPN]


41 percent

In elections this past weekend, Turkey saw a large drop in support for the party of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. With 41 percent of the vote, the AKP won a plurality but lost its majority in Parliament. [The New York Times]





46 cents

After a court ruling, the U.S. Postal Service must reverse a hike in postage for first-class letters. USPS raised the price of a stamp to 49 cents from 46 cents last year (essentially justifying your irrational decision to load up on Forever stamps a couple of years back), but the direct-mail industry fought back. [MSN]



193

Number of individuals who have signed onto the Warren Buffett-Bill Gates pledge to give away half their net worth in life or death. [Bloomberg]

70,000 pounds of bacon
An Amtrak train crashed into a truck hauling 70,000 pounds of bacon, about six days’ supply at my house. [NBC Chicago]


$30 million
Early reports are showing that Melissa McCarthy’s “Spy” won the weekend at the box office, beating out bromantic comedy and Mark Wahlberg fan fiction “Entourage.” [The Hollywood Reporter]


200 million

Estimate for the number of people who use ad-blocking software when browsing the Internet. No comment. [The Economist]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








