
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
17 women

The number of girlfriends who showed up at a man’s hospital bed in China after being contacted by doctors after he’d had an accident. The beaucoup belles had been theretofore unaware of each other’s existence. The man, identified only as “Mr. Yuan,” has been arrested for fraud related to money he took from the women. Some of the women were upset by the accident at first, “But when I started seeing more and more beautiful girls show up, I couldn’t cry any more,” said Xiao Li. [BBC]

27 tornadoes
The number spotted Tuesday through early Wednesday morning in Texas and Oklahoma. Two injuries and no deaths were reported. [The Weather Channel]

103 papers and videos
The number of documents released by the U.S. on Wednesday, obtained during the raid on Osama bin Laden’s compound. The broader message of the documents is familiar: Kill Americans. But some show off the humdrum side of terrorist life, including “a fill-in-the-blanks job application for al-Qaida candidates that not only asks typical human resources questions about education and hobbies but also, ‘Do you wish to execute a suicide operation?'” Another document asks for martyrs’ emergency contact information. [AP]


$115
Ebola workers, Time magazine’s persons of the year, are not exactly well compensated. One hospital burial team in Sierra Leone was promised just $115 a week in “hazard pay.” For months, they did not receive it. For Sierra Leone, “It was a monumental challenge in a country with a cash economy, no digital human resources database, a dearth of accountants, and a history of corruption.” [Newsweek]


180 episodes

The number of shows about nothing you can binge on in a matter of weeks. Hulu has announced that all of “Seinfeld” will be available for streaming, for the first time, starting June 24. Festivus comes early this year. [Entertainment Weekly]


0.77 on a 5-point scale
The large shift toward support of same-sex marriage by voters visited by gay canvassers a month prior, according to a widely cited study by Ph.D. candidate Michael LaCour and political scientist Donald Green. The study was covered by many major media outlets and featured on “This American Life.” It was seen as a major finding — “an affirmation of the power of human contact to overcome disagreement.” The only trouble is … it’s all made up. Green has submitted a retraction to Science, the journal where the article was originally published, after learning that the underlying data was fallacious. LaCour had been offered a prestigious assistant professorship at Princeton, but has since removed any evidence of that fact from his website. [FiveThirtyEight]

1,500 miles





President Barack Obama, insect lover in chief, has revealed a plan to expand “pollinator habitat on rights-of-way.” In other words, the federal government will improve butterfly habitats along Interstate-35, which runs 1,500 miles from the Mexican border to Minnesota. That’s an important path in the Monarch butterfly’s migration. Obama has also proposed restoring 7 million acres of habitat friendly to the ever-struggling bee. [Quartz]

6,500 words

The number of newly playable words just added to the Scrabble dictionary. They include vape, onesie, pwn, lolz, shizzle, grr, yeesh and obvs. And emoji, obvs. These words are valid in the Scrabble lexicon called Collins, which is used in English-language play outside North America, and at World Championships. (The state of the North American dictionary, on the other hand, is a nightmare, lolz.) [Herald Scotland]

$187 million


The amount a Tennessee family bilked from ostensible cancer charities. In fact, the money was spent on “cars, gym memberships, cruise vacations, and college tuition.” For that money, I’m guessing they were the fittest, tannest, most educated family in Tennessee. The Federal Trade Commission has brought suit against James T. Reynolds Sr., his ex-wife and son. The money was solicited, $20 at a time, by telemarketers. [Fox News]


$5.6 billion



In yet more uplifting financial news, five banks will plead guilty and have agreed to pay nearly $6 billion for multiple crimes. Citigroup, JPMorgan Chase, Barclays and the Royal Bank of Scotland will plead guilty to antitrust activities in foreign exchange markets. And UBS will plead guilty to manipulating the London Interbank Offered Rate, or Libor, “a benchmark rate that underpins the cost of trillions of dollars in credit cards and other loans.” Seriously, enough already, people. [DealBook]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Walter Hickey’s magical mystery tour continues apace. So, assuming you’re not too sick of me, if you see a significant digit in the wild tweet it to @WaltHickey @Ollie.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
2.4 percent
This should come as a surprise to exactly no one: No one actually reads Thomas Piketty’s 696-page “Capital in the Twenty-First Century.” Based on a study of annotations in Kindle ebooks, people tend to make it only 2.4 percent of the way through that tome. (I’ve got two copies of it sitting on my bookshelf and, uh, still plan to read it.) Piketty actually edges out Hillary Clinton, though — readers get just 2.04 percent through her “Hard Choices.” [The Fix]

4 inches
How much shorter boys who smoke marijuana before puberty are, according to a new study. So much for, ahem, getting high. (Sorry, I had to do it.) [The Telegraph]

$15 an hour

Los Angeles’s minimum wage … soon. The city council there voted 14-1 to raise the wage from $9 to $15 by the year 2020. If all goes according to plan, the first bump, to $10.50 an hour, will come next summer. [Los Angeles Times]

25 years

How long the human race has been wasting time playing the solitaire game on the Windows operating system. Also, approximately how long nosy passersby have been yelling at me to put that red 7 over there. No, over there! [PC Magazine]


60 percent

The share of Americans who support same-sex marriage — an all-time high according to Gallup. The Supreme Court is set to rule on the issue in June, and it may be that their decision dovetails with the ongoing shift in public opinion. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg officiated a same-sex wedding last weekend and, reportedly, emphasized the word “Constitution.” Many are reading the tea leaves as a positive sign for same-sex marriage proponents. [Gallup]


Over 70 kilograms


The amount of heroin federal authorities seized from a Bronx house over the weekend (in what sounds like a scene from a lost episode of “The Wire”), after a yearlong investigation. That’s roughly 154 pounds, or $50 million worth, of the drug. They also found $2 million in cash under the floorboards. [The New York Times]

6,028 shows
The length of David Letterman’s late-night tenure. The run — which began in 1982 with NBC’s “Late Night” — ends tonight, as he bids farewell to “Late Show” on CBS. [Variety]

40,150 minutes
Just about four weeks, or how long Hillary Clinton had gone without answering a question from the press. The streak was broken Tuesday with “five minutes of questions from various reporters following a group meeting in Iowa.” If she manages to maintain this pace until Election Day, she’ll only answer questions about 19 more times. Make ’em count, reporters. [The Fix]


$25 million




The former bounty for information leading to Osama bin Laden’s whereabouts, and the current figure for Ayman al-Zawahiri, bin Laden’s successor as al-Qaida leader. Some, however, think these figures should be much higher. Economist Alex Tabarrok has written that the bounty on bin Laden should’ve been $500 million. “We could have avoided several wars at that price.” [The Atlantic]


33.8 million vehicles






The number of vehicles airbag manufacturer Takata said it would declare defective. The move affects 11 automakers, and is in response to airbag inflators which can lead to lethal explosions. It’s thought to be the biggest recall of any consumer product in U.S. history, eclipsing the recall of 31 million bottles of Tylenol in the early 1980s. Six deaths and over 100 injuries have been linked to the airbags. [The Detroit News]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Walter Hickey? Walter Hickey? Nope, guess he’s still on vacation. Well, if you see a significant digit in the wild you should tweet it to me @WaltHickey @Ollie.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe. 
2-to-3

The early odds on American Pharoah to win the Belmont Stakes and capture the first Triple Crown since Affirmed in 1978. But, as my colleague Ben Morris warned, one should be skeptical of the heavy favorite. It is entirely conceivable that, on June 6, one of the many other fast horses will run faster than that one fast horse. [International Business Times]


$15



The cost of a CD, obtained via a FOIA request, containing the internal communications of the Maricopa County Sheriff’s Office while they were chasing two escaped llamas through Sun City, Arizona, in February. For my money, easily the best llama-related investment since the Inca Empire. [MuckRock]


65 Twitter accounts

Barack Obama — “dad, husband, and 44th President of the United States” — has joined Twitter. While his following exploded to over a million in an afternoon, he follows just 65 accounts. They’re the usual suspects: the First Lady, former presidents, his almae matres, Chicago’s professional sports teams. Er, except the Cubs. Mr. President, you’re hereby on bandwagon-watch come October. [Bloomberg]

$4,000



The cost of a doctoral degree from such prestigious schools as Columbiana and Barkley. [The New York Times]

11,000 calls

The number of calls to poison control centers in 2013 related to the consumption of laundry detergent pods. Don’t eat laundry detergent pods. While the pods have been decried as a poison hazard to children unlike any other, the 11,000 number was actually dwarfed by cases concerning acetaminophen, multivitamins, bleaches and diaper cream. Don’t eat diaper cream. [Wonkblog]


$750,000
The restaurant Chili’s investment in an “egg-wash spread” that is apparently meant to make its food more photogenic, and therefore photos of it more shareable on social media like Instagram. Please excuse me while I slather myself in egg-wash spread and take a selfie. [The Huffington Post]


1.2 million warrants


The number of open arrest warrants in New York City, a city with a population of about 8.4 million. Mayor Bill de Blasio’s criminal justice coordinator, Elizabeth Glazer, said in a statement that officials are looking into “how to safely reduce the number of already outstanding warrants in this city.” This reform would likely take the form of amnesty. [AP]




26 million birds

The Hawkeye State has a few other fowl to deal with, and is seeking help. After bird flu cases were reported in the state, Iowa has been turned down by Nebraska and South Dakota, which fear contamination if the dead birds — mountains of chickens, turkeys and ducks — are discarded in their landfills. [The Des Moines Register]

40 million pain pills
The average annual shipment of prescription painkillers into West Virginia by drug wholesalers between 2007 and 2012. During that time, “distributors shipped 59.9 million oxycodone pills and 140.6 million hydrocodone pills” to the state. West Virginia has a population of 1.85 million. Those two drugs are widely abused, and lead to more overdose deaths there than any other. [The Charleston Gazette]

$8 billion
The increase in Apple’s market value after billionaire Carl Icahn tweeted that he thought Apple stock was undervalued. Icahn’s own position in the company, through his Icahn Associates fund, increased in value by $76.5 million in a day. Boy I tell ya, I really need to get one of those hedge funds. [MarketWatch]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
As mysteriously as he arrived, Walter Hickey was gone. Well, actually, he’s just on vacation this week, so if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey @Ollie.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe. 
2


The number of wins Barcelona and the impossible Lionel Messi are away from completing a historic “treble” — same-year victories in a national league, a national cup and a continental competition. After clinching the La Liga title on Sunday, Barcelona will face Athletic Bilbao in the Copa del Rey final on May 30, and Juventus in the Champions League final on June 6. Only a handful of teams in history, including Barcelona in the 2008-9 season, has completed the feat. Here comes treble? [ESPN FC]


7 percent




The share of elite athletes with a heart abnormality, based on a study of 2,354 Italian Olympic hopefuls. You see, this is why I don’t work out. [The Times]


9

The number of people killed in a shootout between rival biker gangs Sunday in Waco, Texas. The tragedy began as a fist fight, and “quickly escalated,” involving hands, feet, chains, knives and guns. Eighteen people were taken to the hospital. [CNN]

11



The number of Republican presidential hopefuls who addressed potential supporters at the Iowa GOP’s Lincoln Dinner in Des Moines on Saturday. In roughly 258 days, fully grown Iowans will crowd elementary school gymnasia across the state in a bizarre local ritual known as a “caucus.” [The New York Times]

15 years

The average time that an inmate executed in 2013 had spent on death row. Dzhokhar Tsarnaev was sentenced to death on Friday for his role in the Boston Marathon bombing, but he’s unlikely to be executed any time soon, according to my colleague Ben Casselman’s analysis. Tsarnaev’s sentence came in federal court. Between 1988 and 2013, 71 federal defendants were sentenced to death, but only three have been executed. [FiveThirtyEight]

1971
The year of the first lawful same-sex wedding in the United States — at least according to the two men who got married. Forty-four years later, as the Supreme Court considers whether to legalize same-sex marriage nationwide, Jack Baker and Michael McConnell “are still happily married, and they love each other.” [The New York Times]


$2,800 a month
The official definition of “affordable” apartment rent for a family of four in New York City, according to a proposal by Mayor Bill de Blasio to extend tax breaks to certain landlords. New York I love you, but you’re freaking me out. If Walter Hickey were here, he’d probably tell me to move to Jersey City. [Capital New York]


4,296


The new record for most selfies taken simultaneously, set on Saturday. That many duck faces would strike fear into anyone’s heart, and I haven’t even told you that they were all Cardinals fans in Busch Stadium. The horror. [PR Newswire]




1 million air miles

The top prize offered by United Airlines to any “ethical hacker” who uncovers a major flaw in its security system. The bounty comes after a not-so-ethical hacker claimed to be able to control an airliner via the inflight entertainment system. No word yet on the prize for developing edible airline food, however. [NBC News]

$200 million
The potential payout to victims that Amtrak may face after last week’s derailment in Philadelphia. It’s the upper limit — the most Amtrak would possibly pay — set by Congress in 1997, in an effort to “rescue Amtrak from financial ruin.” The amount may not, however, be enough to cover the costs of the eight deaths and over 200 injuries suffered. [AP]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
The inimitable, vacationing Walter Hickey has handed me the keys to this column, so if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey @Ollie. I’ll be here all week.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
3.6 percent
After a report that showed many users of online dating applications may already be in relationships, mobile app Hinge did an internal review and found that 3.6 percent of profiles belonged to people who said they were married or in a relationship. “Sure,” a local lifestyle writer was heard assuring himself, “that’s why you’re not getting messages.” [Daily Dot]

13 percent
Annual growth rate of carbon emissions from powering data centers, according to Greenpeace. [Wired]


26 percent
Percentage of Americans who think the Iraq War was worth it. This may irk presumed GOP presidential candidate Jeb Bush, who has been caught off guard with questions about how he would have handled the conflict. Let’s be real here: If your last name is “Bush,” you probably need to go into an election knowing people are going to bring up Iraq, just like if your last name is “Clinton” you know they’ll ask about the mighty sarlacc pit of your finances, or if your last name is “O’Malley” they’ll ask, “Who?” [FiveThirtyEight]

42.1 percent
Proportion of U.S. bee colonies that died off in the past year, according to a survey of beekeepers. That’s not great because we need bees to pollinate our food, produce honey, and tactfully aid in explaining sex with birds, or something. [Quartz]




150 kilograms
A Hong Kong man was arrested in Sydney Thursday after being caught smuggling 150 kilograms of methamphetamine into Australia. [Australian Broadcasting Company]


179 pounds

Former U.S. presidential candidate Mitt Romney weighed in at 179 pounds Thursday ahead of a charity boxing match against Evander Holyfield. [MSNBC]


$75,000
ABC News anchor George Stephanopoulos — who, full disclosure, also works for The Walt Disney Company, just like me — apologized for contributing $75,000 to the Clinton Foundation over three years and not disclosing the donations publicly. Stephanopoulos also pulled out of moderating any GOP presidential debates. [CNN Money]

More than 100,000 accounts

Upwards of 100,000 accounts suspected of automating gameplay on MMORPG World of Warcraft were banned, the company behind the game announced on Thursday. [PC Gamer]


$14 million
“The Simpsons” and Harry Shearer, who voices a number of characters on the show, were reportedly unable to ink a deal for a $14 million contract over two seasons. [CNN]

$49.3 million
That’s how much money Harvard University, a massive investment fund that is also known for providing education, paid six endowment managers last year. [Bloomberg]

I’m on vacation next week — in Ann Arbor, Michigan, if anyone wants to get a drink or whatever — so Oliver Roeder will be guest-hosting this feature! You’ll recognize him from his killer board game and Supreme Court coverage.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. Except next week. Next week tweet it @Ollie. 







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
No. 3 
The third-ranked chess player on the planet is joining Team USA! Fabiano Caruana is switching his federation affiliation to the U.S. from Italy. U.S. chess is spending a lot of money to recruit this kind of talent. [The New York Times]


4-3
The New York Rangers beat the Washington Capitals with an overtime goal last night and will advance to the Eastern Conference finals. [ESPN]

60 percent

A survey of partners at 320 law firms found that three in five reported overcapacity was cutting into profits. At this point, I’d bet that every single person involved in the legal industry has screamed as loudly as possible at people considering law as a profession to stop doing so. [Bloomberg]


106 miles per hour
The Amtrak train that derailed near Philadelphia on Tuesday was traveling more than double the speed limit around a curve when it went off the tracks. [The New York Times]

338-88

The House of Representatives voted to reauthorize the Patriot Act, but stripped out language that allowed the government to collect a database of bulk phone surveillance. The bill goes on to the Senate, where leaders have indicated they’re pretty OK with the whole indiscriminate dragnet thing. [Ars Technica]




900%

Kayem, a Mumbai pharmaceutical company, raised the price of the anesthetic sodium thiopental 900 percent when it found out South Dakota intended to use the drug for human executions. The drugs used in lethal injections are in short supply as many manufacturers step away from providing them for executions. [The Atlantic]



$750,000
Azerbaijan’s state-owned oil company funneled three-quarters of a million dollars through nonprofits to pay for a visit from 10 members of U.S. Congress and their staffs. This wasn’t fully disclosed. Most importantly, one member who received a number of rugs said she did not disclose the gift because she “did not think they were particularly valuable,” according to The Washington Post. “She also thought that they were unattractive,” which I think should be a totally legal and legitimate reason to not disclose the value of a gift. [The Washington Post]

$12 million
Cost to eradicate rats from South Georgia Island over four years. The pests can be catastrophic for fauna on the island, which is located about a thousand miles from Antarctica. The attempt to kill all the rats, which ended in March, is considered the largest such mission in any place ever. [The Verge]

 $52 million
How much the British singer Sarah Brightman paid to have a Soyuz rocket fly her to the International Space Station. The performer has suspended the plans, but that’s a cool insight into how much it costs these days to get a lift out of Baikonur. [Yahoo]


$44 billion
While income tax returns stayed relatively flat, American taxpayers paid $44 billion more to the government during filing season this year. That may have actually made a dent in the economy in April, as consumers had a little less cash on hand. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1.7 percent fall
Verizon is going to buy AOL for $4.4 billion, but you probably knew that already. Not saying you should read into this all too much — daily stock moves are rarely significant digits — but Verizon stock did fall 1.7 percent yesterday on the news. AOL stock, on the other hand, jumped 18 percent in morning trading. [The Wall Street Journal]

2 times the national average

Research from Hershey’s found that Utahans consume candy at a rate almost twice the national average. How come? Three in five Utah residents are Mormons, a group for whom sweets is one allowed indulgence. Plus, the state skews young. [Bloomberg]


2.5 percent
That’s how much alcohol consumption is down overall in wealthy countries in the last 20 years, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. But the OECD says there’s a newer “major public health and social concern” of binge drinking among young people. [Associated Press]

5 moons
NASA’s New Horizon probe is close enough to Pluto to snap images that capture each of the planet’s five known moons. Sure, Charon is the main object in Pluto’s life — and vice versa — but the four smaller moons Styx, Nix, Kerberos and Hydra (I just checked, only “Nix” has not been taken by a band with sweet taste in names) are now somewhat in clear view. [NASA]

27 percent
A Department of Transportation report saw a 27 percent increase in complaints submitted by air travelers in March over February. One possible reason? It was the first time Spirit Airlines was included in the report. [WLRN]

40 percent 
Being a superhero is dangerous work: 40 percent of characters who were Avengers in the comic books died at least once. Don’t worry, most of them came back a-OK, because comic books are weird. [FiveThirtyEight]


46 percent

The percentage of New York City residents who think Bill de Blasio is distracted from his duties as mayor by his work in national affairs. De Blasio announced a progressive “contract with America” in D.C. on Tuesday, but I smelled urine on a subway platform during my morning commute, so please get with the program, Mayor, you have stuff to do. [Quinnipiac]


99 cents
Wal-Mart’s generic-brand bottled water could come from anywhere really — it’s tap water — but of course it comes from dry-as-hell California. The city of Sacramento charges 99 cents for every 748 gallons consumed by bottler DS Services of America, which supplies Great Value bottled water to the retailer, where it’s sold for 88 cents per gallon. So, you know, slight mark-up. [CBS Sacramento]


$7.85 million
A University of Virginia dean filed a defamation suit against Rolling Stone magazine over a discredited story by Sabrina Rubin Erdely that claimed a horrific sexual assault occurred on the dean’s watch. [The Guardian]

37 million metric tons

Even though large portions of the nation’s population are lactose intolerant, China has become the world’s third-largest producer of cow’s milk, after the U.S. and India. [Quartz]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4 games
NFL commissioner Roger Goodell dropped the hammer on the New England Patriots Monday, punishing the team after a report determined it was more likely than not that members of the organization deliberately deflated footballs before key games. Quarterback Tom Brady was suspended for four games, and the team was fined $1 million and docked two draft picks. [ESPN]


1 in 6
While serial killers are often pictured as male, about 1 in 6 are women. [The New Yorker]


$9
Cost of a new micro-PC announced on Kickstarter. The Chip would ship in 2016. [PC World]

15 seasons

All things must come to an end, and “American Idol” — which I learned yesterday is still on television — will end next year after competing its 15th season. The desiccated and hideous portrait hidden in the ageless Ryan Seacrest’s attic was unavailable for comment. [Bloomberg]


54 percent

A new study suggests that more than half of people who reported using drugs only on weekends would, within the next six months, eventually decide to innovate and start using drugs on other days of the week as well. Because when you think about it, the days of the week are really pretty arbitrary, man. [Los Angeles Times]


 $82,594
Hey, remember yesterday when we talked about all the taxpayer money New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is spending on lawyers? Well, here’s round two: An investigation found that Christie debited $82,594 in taxpayer funds to the concessions at Delaware North Sportservice, the guys who run the stadium where the Jets and Giants play. [New Jersey Watchdog]

1.7 million miles
That’s how many miles the director of Google’s self-driving car program said autonomous vehicles have travelled over the past six years of testing. [Medium]

53.5 million

We did it! Millennials are now a plurality of American workers, with 53.5 million people ages 18 to 34 in the workforce in 2015, compared to 52.7 million Gen Xers and 44.6 million baby boomers. I was born in the ’90s and I have a job — get used to it, boomers, my people are here to stay. [Pew Research Center]


$179,365,000
There’s a new record for sale price at auction for a work of art, with a Picasso selling for $179 million and change at Christie’s. [@ChristiesInc and NBC News]

$500 billion
So Dodd-Frank says that any bank with $50 billion in assets is under enhanced supervision from the government because it’s considered too big to fail — that covers 33 financial institutions. Sen. Richard Shelby, who’s now running the show at the Senate banking committee, is trying to raise the threshold to $500 billion, which would affect only six institutions. Realistically, that’s probably just an opening bid to strike a deal with banking committee Democrats. Either way, raising the floor would help banks just skirting underneath the $50 billion asset threshold expand. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4 percent

That’s Alabama’s existing tax on rentals of “tangible personal property.”  The state’s department of revenue wants to extend that tax to rentals on, say, Netflix, which generally speaking is pretty intangible and impersonal. [The Washington Post]


5th-most productive

Willie Mays saw his career home run record eclipsed by beleaguered Yankee Alex Rodriguez last Thursday, but the stats still appear to show that Mays was the better ballplayer. Looking at all-time wins above replacement, Mays is in fifth place in the annals of baseball history, while A-Rod is 17th. [FiveThirtyEight]


11 percent
The new cigarette tax rate in China, up from 5 percent. About 1 million Chinese citizens die annually from smoking-related illnesses. The last time China raised the tax, the State Monopoly of Tobacco Administration — which owns the country’s cigarette manufacturer because, you know, communism — isolated actual smokers from the tax and just ate the costs. So let’s just wait and see how this goes. [Bloomberg]

At least 12 arrests
Please never change, Massachusetts: More than 100 people were involved in a brawl at Revere Beach in Massachusetts on Mother’s Day. There were at least 12 arrests after an altercation that began between two women and their friends spiraled into an all-out fight at the beach. [NECN]

60 kimberlite pipes
New research suggests that the plant Pandanus candelabrum can grow the presence of kimberlite pipes, or underground columns of volcanic rock. Who cares? Well, there are about 6,000 known kimberlite pipes, and a tenth of them have diamonds in them, and about a tenth of those have enough diamonds to be worth digging up. So keep your eyes peeled for Pandanus candelabrum. I don’t really know how this works but between you and me, this weekend I’m going to check to see if there might be diamonds under the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Shh! [CNET]

$86
Current projection for the fare to ride California’s future bullet train from Los Angeles to San Francisco. If you follow technology at all, you probably know by now that Californians are really bad at estimating the actual value of things — be it a train ticket or a startup — so it should come as no surprise that the estimate has been as low as $50 and as high as $105. [Los Angeles Times]

 $1.1 million to $2.3 million
That was the range of the value of former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke’s assets back when he was running America’s favorite helicopter-based cash-distribution entity. He’s probably a little bit further in the black now that he’s consulting for Pacific Investment Management Co. and the hedge fund Citadel. [Bloomberg]



$5.4 million
That’s how much the U.S. Department of Defense paid NFL teams to honor and thank the nation’s troops from 2011 to 2014. The funds mostly came from the National Guard. [NJ.com via Scout]

$11,118,775.13

As of Friday, that’s how much money has been spent by the state of New Jersey on legal bills for the parties involved in the “bridgegate” scandal. About $7.8 million went to foot the legal bills of members of the governor’s office. [WNYC’s Matt Katz]


$50 billion
Uber is considering raising another $1.5 billion in funding, which would value the company at $50 billion, basically making it a herd of unicorns if my Silicon Valley terminology is up to date. [The New York Times]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5 degree angle
The laughably porous White House fence is about to get a little more intimidating as the Secret Service plans to install sharp metal points extending outward at a five degree angle on the top of the fence. At the very least that will show the pigeons who’s boss. [Reuters]

$10 per day

The starting wage for some manicurists in New York City, according to a new New York Times expose. That is not a typo. [The New York Times]


56 seats

Two top stories out of the U.K. election: the Conservative party’s surprising dominance — as of this writing it’s within a seat of an outright majority, and is projected to attain it — and the rise of the Scottish National Party, which won 56 Parliamentary seats, up from 6 seats previously. [FiveThirtyEight]


150 percent

Hepatitis C infections increased 150 percent from 2010 to 2013, driven largely by people who used injected drugs. [BuzzFeed]


152 selfies

A Fusion analysis of 152 Instagrammed selfies taken by Kim Kardashian over the course of one year found that 21 percent were taken in a mirror, 12 percent were taken outdoors, and 8 percent were taken while the celebrity was in bed. You may scoff at this, but this is probably the use of numbers that the most Americans will care about all year. [Fusion]


186.4 miles per hour
“Guy goes fast on a thing in a place” records are not usually that interesting, but I’m willing to make an exception. Idris Elba — the guy from “The Wire” and “Thor” — broke the U.K. land speed record in a Bentley Continental GT Speed on a beach, maxing out at 186.4 miles per hour. [CNN Money]

$35,000
The biggest issue Tesla has had with getting normal people to buy their cars has been the price. But that may change. Founder and plausible Bond villain Elon Musk said in an earnings call that the company is planning on unveiling the Tesla Model 3 with a predicted price of $35,000 sometime next March. [Geek.com]


$800,000
LOCAL BOY MAKES GOOD: Stephen Colbert announced that the sales of his old set would be put towards funding every single grant request from teachers at South Carolina public schools on DonorsChoose.org. The donation amounts to about $800,000 overall. [Greenville News]



10.9 million
FitBit, the fitness and sleep tracker company, sold 21 million devices since the company began operations in 2007. What’s more, almost half of those wearables — 10.9 million — were sold last year. The company is looking to have an IPO. [Re/Code]

$4.5 billion
That’s Nintendo’s sales last year, bolstered by the Amiibo interactive figurine. The biggest news out of the company, though, was a plan to team up with Universal Parks & Resorts to build Nintendo attractions in theme parks. Just FYI Nintendo, I would probably pay $500 for the experience of actually catching a Pokémon. [Wired]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.

Have a great weekend everyone!






