
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
9 downgrades
We’re going to hear a lot about fiscal conservatism from the crowd vying for the GOP nomination — the governors alone could field a baseball team — so one thing worth looking at is the fiscal health of states while the candidates were leading them. NPR examined one proxy for a state’s financial and economic health, credit ratings, and found that all but one governor in the field saw their states’ ratings remain the same or improve. On the other hand, New Jersey’s credit rating has been downgraded three times by each of the three major credit rating agencies under Gov. Chris Christie. [NPR]






4 million


The personal data of 4 million current and former federal employees may have been stolen in a cybersecurity incident, U.S. officials said Thursday. Officials believe Chinese hackers were behind the breach. [CNN]



27.6 point difference
Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry formally entered the GOP nomination race Thursday. His previous presidential campaign experience makes him a bit of an outlier — he holds the record for the largest disparity between monthly national polling average (in the months before primary voting began) and actual vote share achieved during a primary. [FiveThirtyEight]


80 votes
Editorial employees of Gawker Media voted 80-27 to unionize under the Writers Guild of America, East. [Gawker]

133 Greek organizations

An analysis of fraternity and sorority suspensions, disbandments and punishments found that 133 chapters at 55 U.S. colleges were hit with penalties during the spring semester alone. [Bloomberg]

3.1 million
The number of viewers that Megyn Kelly’s Fox News interview with the Duggar family — of TLC’s “19 Kids and Counting” — had Wednesday night. It was the first time the Duggars had spoken to the media since details emerged about the sexual misconduct of their eldest son. [Associated Press]



5 million euros

The CEO of the Football Association of Ireland said FIFA paid the soccer organization 5 million euros to avoid a lawsuit over a French handball that kept Ireland out of the 2010 World Cup. FIFA, for what it’s word is worth, says the amount was $5 million, for a construction project. But in for a penny in for a pound, you know? [The Guardian]



$15.5 million

Brooklyn has a new record for the most expensive home sale: $15.5 million for a townhouse at 177 Pacific St. The previous record was $12.5 million for Truman Capote’s old haunt. [NY1]


$7 billion

Fun fact: The primary type of banana consumed by humans was eradicated from Earth in the 1950s because of a blight. The type of bananas that people eat today — Cavendish bananas — are a totally different type than the Gros Michel bananas that people noshed down in the 1940s. The issue is that all our eggs are once again in the same botanical basket, and if another banana plague were to sweep the world — like, say, the new banana fungus that has spread to Australia from Africa and Asia — we’d be reduced to plantains or some other alternative. The international banana market is worth more than $7 billion. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
6 homes

An investigation from ProPublica and NPR found that despite hauling in almost half a billion dollars, the American Red Cross constructed only six permanent homes in Haiti after a devastating earthquake in 2010. The Red Cross says it has used the money to help Haitians by repairing homes, providing clean water and vaccinations, and through other assistance projects. [NPR]

8 ounces

Assuming that you’re willing to wait four to eight business days, Amazon will now ship items that weigh 8 ounces or less to you for free. [The Verge]

10 times sharper

Earth is getting a new, awesome telescope. Upwards of $500 million in international funding was announced Wednesday for the Giant Magellan Telescope, which will try to find Earth-like planets around nearby stars. The telescope will produce images up to 10 times sharper than those from the Hubble Space Telescope. [The University of Arizona]


51 labs


Remember how the government apparently sent a live anthrax sample though the mail? Remember when it hedged on exactly which lab the live sample went to? Yeah, now we know why. The U.S. government actually sent live samples of anthrax to 51 labs in 17 states and three different nations. Fun fact: The preceding three sentences are now the logline on a disaster movie screenplay I just started working on. [Reuters]

61 percent
Sixty-one percent of respondents to a new poll said they think that only a few people at the top of the economic heap have a chance to get ahead. [The New York Times]

139 killings
About 30 percent of the police killings of Americans this year that have been recorded in a new database from the Guardian occurred in census tracts that are in the lowest 20 percent nationally in terms of household income. [FiveThirtyEight]



$100,000
WikiLeaks is offering $100,000 for the text of the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal — a classified document — and is attempting to crowdsource the money to pay the reward. [Reuters]

45,027,793

Notice that eggs are getting more expensive? That’s because as of Wednesday, bird flu had affected 45,027,793 chickens and turkeys in the U.S. since December. That is, incidentally, the logline for a second disaster movie screenplay I just started working on. It’s going to be a great summer. [USDA, via Bloomberg]



$12 billion
A new report from PricewaterhouseCoopers forecasts that the revenue from electronic home-video rentals — through downloads and from streaming services like Netflix — will hit $12 billion in 2017, eclipsing U.S. box office revenue. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
2
Shonda Rhimes, creator of the TV shows “Grey’s Anatomy” and “Scandal,” has a book coming out in the fall called “Year of Yes” that is all about her taking on a yearlong challenge to say “yes” to experiences. That’s great. The issue? Well, for one thing, Maria Dahvana Headley’s book titled “The Year of Yes” about the author taking on a yearlong challenge to say “yes” to experiences was published in 2006. So that makes two “Year of Yes” books, I suppose. [Time, @MARIADAHVANA, via John Scalzi]

3 percent

Former New York Gov. George Pataki has exploded in popularity, at least compared with his negligible rounding error of a performance before the most recent round of polling. A CNN poll has him at 3 percent — which in fairness is the survey’s sampling error. [CNN (PDF)]

$13 per hour

Wal-Mart will raise the baseline starting wage for some managers, the retailer said Tuesday, several months after announcing increases in the minimum wages of some general employees. The pay range for managers of some departments will rise from $10.30-$20.09 per hour to $13-$24.70 in August; the minimum will then rise to $15 per hour in February. [The New York Times]

13.5 percent reduction

Residents of California, the dry state on everyone’s mind, reduced consumption of water by 13.5 percent in April, compared with the same month two years earlier. Gov. Jerry Brown has mandated that cities and towns cut water use by 25 percent. [Associated Press]


84 percent

That’s the percentage of people who believe money has too much influence in politics, according to a new poll. And Republicans and Democrats aren’t very far apart on this issue. So this means we solved it, right? We’re all on the same page? Not quite. See, while a lot of people think it, less than 1 percent care about it enough to make it a top priority. [The Washington Post]



128GB
SanDisk released a thumb drive smaller than a dime with a 128 gigabyte capacity, a substantial breakthrough for portable consumer storage. [Wired]


$4,225


That’s the median monthly rent in San Francisco. Median! Monthly! Rents in the area are up 16 percent year over year as of April. I sent this to several friends who are hardened New Yorkers, and even they were freaked out. We are worried about you, San Francisco. Please let us know if you need help. [SFGate]

 17 million

Annual album sales of contemporary Christian music in 2014, down from a peak of 50 million in the late 1990s. And while the story “album sales in genre decline” is not breaking news in the wondrous year of 2015, the way the genre’s transformation from mainstream music into a niche act gutted listenership is really interesting. [The Week]



$103.8 million
Quarterback Cam Newton has signed a $103.8 million, five-year extension with the Carolina Panthers. [ESPN]

$3.3 billion
Fitbit — the company behind the wearable fitness tracker that I once lost in an inebriated Fitbit throwing contest yet still feel odd nostalgia for — is planning for its initial public offering; it hopes to raise $478 million for a $3.3 billion valuation. Good for them. How I miss you, Fitty. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4 hours and 3 minutes

Caitlyn Jenner, who formerly went by Bruce, smashed President Obama’s record for the shortest time to gain 1 million followers on Twitter after debuting a new account Monday. [Associated Press]

13 gallons
Measuring the water debt incurred by various foodstuffs is all the rage these days, what with California’s dual status as a producer of lots of our food and the site of a historic and devastating drought. But the real question on all of our minds — well, mine at least — is how to ethically get drunk in such trying times. The answer is wine, which has a “water footprint” of 13 gallons per glass. That is less than the 14.5-gallon footprint of a bottle of beer. [Mother Jones]


$30

Estimated cost added per minute when a plane stands idle at the boarding gate, according to researchers from Northern Illinois University. This summer, Delta Air Lines and Southwest Airlines are experimenting with new boarding procedures designed to cut down on time squandered at the gate. [Associated Press]



57 percent 

Hawkish U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina has entered the 2016 race for the GOP presidential nomination. Since 2013, more Republican voters have come to share Graham’s worldview: According to recent polling, 57 percent believe that U.S. anti-terrorism policies do not go far enough in protecting the country, up from 38 percent two years ago. [FiveThirtyEight]

More than 60 percent

The share of the Iranian population that is younger than 40, a group of people who appear to be more interested in change for their nation than their elders. Young people in Iran are engaged in a “silent movement” that is “defined by a style of life rather than politics,” according to the foreign editor of the Financial Times. [The Takeaway]



67 out of 70
The Transportation Security Administration is laughably incompetent when it comes to what amounts to basically its only job, failing 67 out of 70 times to catch undercover investigators smuggling imitation explosives and weapons through security checkpoints. [ABC News]

More than 490 minutes
The amount of time that people spend each day with media, primarily television, according to a new report. The Internet saw the largest growth over the past five years, with people, on average, doubling the time they spend online. [Quartz]


125 million copies
Guess what, America: “Fifty Shades of Grey” is back. Author E L James has a new offering for the series titled “Grey.” Barring an unforeseen kink in the plans, it will come out June 18. So far, 125 million copies of the books in the trilogy have been sold. [Variety]



 $17 billion

The amount of money in the reserves of the Florida Hurricane Catastrophe Fund, which is relatively flush after years without a hurricane in the state. This year’s hurricane season, which began June 1, is predicted to have fewer storms than normal. [Reuters]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at  @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
10 percent
Some parts of Europe and Asia are seeing a rise in crime among seniors. In London, arrests of people 65 and older were up 10 percent from March 2009 to March 2014; in South Korea, crimes committed by people in that age group rose 12.2 percent from 2011 to 2013; and in Japan, crimes by people over 65 more than doubled from 2003 to 2013. The U.S. doesn’t appear to be experiencing this trend. [Bloomberg]

34 robotics engineers


Uber raided the Carnegie Mellon robotics center for its own lab, luring away six principal investigators and 34 engineers and leaving one of the world’s top robotics research institutions understaffed. [The Wall Street Journal] 



$40 for 4 weeks

A startup has realized a whole new level of human laziness, offering to bring users’ garbage cans to the curb for the low price of $10 per week (four to six cans). [TrashDay]

385
That’s how many people have been fatally shot by police officers in the United States in the first five months of 2015, about two killings per day, according to a Washington Post analysis. [The Washington Post]


77 to 17


The Senate voted to take up the USA Freedom Act, which would stop an NSA program that collects telephone data in bulk. [The Guardian]

$200,000
You’re supposed to recycle old electronics, but there’s probably an exception to be made for valuable vintage computers from the halcyon days of Silicon Valley. A recycling center received an original Apple I computer worth $200,000 from a mystery woman, and it’s trying to track the do-gooder down. [CBS San Francisco]

$10 million per year

NBC is in a bit of a pickle. It is trying to find a way to keep Brian Williams, who was suspended from his job at “NBC Nightly News” after questions were raised about his retellings of incidents that took place when he was reporting on the Iraq War. One option apparently being considered is to give Williams, whose current contract is reportedly worth $10 million per year over five years, a new role. [CNN Money]




$20.2 million
The value of Social Security benefits that were paid to suspected former Nazis and others who may have participated in the Third Reich’s atrocities. The payments were made to the more than 130 people between 1962 and 2015. [The Associated Press]


$400 million

The budget shortfall that Kansas is looking forward to next fiscal year, and with not a lot left to cut in the state budget, the GOP-controlled legislature may have to do the unspeakable: raise some taxes. [The New York Times]



$4.9 billion

The estimated amount of government subsidies that companies owned by Elon Musk — Tesla, SpaceX, and SolarCity — have reaped. [Los Angeles Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at  @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
2 winners
It’s a tie! There were two winners of the Scripps National Spelling Bee for the second consecutive year. Congrats to Vanya Shivashankar and Gokul Venkatachalam. “Nunatak” was the winning word. [The Guardian]


Nearly 8 years

Our long national nightmare is over: A judge has ended Lindsay Lohan’s probation, a legal saga that has lasted since 2007. The actress intends to return to working. I, for one, am looking forward to the Lohanaissance. [Associated Press]

9 labs

The Army announced Wednesday it mailed live samples of anthrax to several labs in the U.S. and South Korea. Thursday a spokesperson indicated that the samples may have been alive not because of human error, but instead because of a technical failure in killing all of the anthrax. The government is not saying which lab in which state got the live anthrax, but no one was hurt. [Associated Press]


$31.61


New research from the National Low Income Housing Coalition figured out how much workers need to earn per hour to rent a 2-bedroom apartment in each state. Hawaii had the highest needed wage, $31.61 per hour to sustain a two-bedder. [CityLab]

69 percent

Generally if you want to be elected President of the United States, you have to be a well-liked person. Donald Trump is not that person. The reality television show performer has scheduled a major announcement for June 16 — potentially that presidential bid — even though polling says he has a 69 percent unfavorable rating nationwide. [Quinnipiac]


$35,000

How much Washington D.C. will spend to study the effects of building a gondola system between Georgetown and Rosslyn across the Potomac River in Virginia. I have studied the matter and would be glad to tell the nation’s capital that gondolas are silly ways to travel for far less than $35,000. [Washington Post]

200,000 sharks fins
Authorities in Ecuador seized 200,000 shark fins in nine raids throughout the port of Manta. The fins were illegally bound for Asia, reportedly. [BBC]


$1.53 million

Average sale price in the 212 New York City area code for a resale condo or co-op in the first quarter of this year. A New York Times analysis found only 113 sale listings for units in Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens or Manhattan with a view of water that were priced lower than $500,000. That’s in a city comprised largely of islands! [The New York Times]


$3.5 million
Former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert was charged with lying to the FBI. The former speaker allegedly attempted to discreetly pay someone $3.5 million to hush up “past misconduct.” [The New York Times]

$36 million
Canada will no longer charge general sales tax on feminine hygiene products effective July 1. The taxes on tampons, menstrual pads and other such products constituted a cash transfer from women to their government of about $36 million annually. [The Globe and Mail]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey. Have a good weekend!









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
0 percent

Percentage of Republicans who said they would vote for former New York governor George Pataki for president. He intends to announce his candidacy for the presidency Thursday. [Fox News Poll]

2 seasons
Serial, the hit podcast from This American Life’s Sarah Koenig, is recording not one, but two seasons simultaneously to follow up on its acclaimed first season. Time to fire up the ol’ FiveThirtyEight Serial insanity wall again. [The AV Club]

4 turtles
Only 4 Yangtze giant softshell turtles remain in the world — all in captivity, and all but one male. In a last-ditch effort scientists are resorting to artificially inseminating the 100-year-old female in order to save the species. No pressure or anything. [San Diego Zoo Blog]


21 pages


California has released the new standards it will enforce for workplace safety at pornographic film production sites. It’s 21 pages long and the basic gist is that now certain things are going to require goggles. Do the hirsute plumbers that the comely homeowner never ordered also now need to be licensed and insured? [Boing Boing]

28 percent decline

That’s how much the U.S. consumption of beef has dropped in the past three decades. One side effect of this? Leather is getting a lot more expensive, and U.S. businesses are feeling the squeeze. [Bloomberg]

30-19

A bill to abolish the death penalty in Nebraska has become law after the Nebraska senate overrode a gubernatorial veto 30-19. [KETV]


38 percent

A new survey from the Federal Reserve found that 31 percent of working adults have no retirement savings, and 38 percent have no intention to retire. Proving once again that it’s the baby boomers who are the irresponsible generation, a quarter of workers 45 and older have not planned pensions or retirement savings. [Reuters]


 79 percent 

Syphilis cases in Rhode Island are up 79 percent between 2013 and 2014, and officials are blaming hook-up apps. [The Huffington Post]


118 degrees

A major heat wave is hitting India right now, claiming more than a thousand lives and melting asphalt in the hottest areas. Temperatures hit 118 degrees Fahrenheit in Balangir District. [The Atlantic]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
7 percent 
That’s the USDA estimate of the percent of veterans who used food stamps in 2012. Last year, $84 million in SNAP benefits was spent at on-base commissaries. [Marketplace via @ExcellentReads]

14 officials
Last night Swiss law enforcement arrested several FIFA officials who will soon face extradition to the U.S. on corruption charges. 14 officials have been indicted by the U.S. When it comes to corruption FIFA makes Silvio Berlusconi look like the Pope. [The New York Times]


24.6 percent

An analysis of a sample of verified twitter accounts found that journalists made up about a quarter of accounts with the blue checkmarks, the largest subset of the verified group. I’m not telling what you’ll find at @WaltHickey. [Medium]


$30
Cost of something called the “Everyday Pantsuit Tee” at Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s campaign shop. [People Magazine]

72,000 ladybugs

Seven brilliant innovators had their creativity stifled and vision squashed after they allegedly released 72,000 ladybugs in Chopticon High School in the dead of night as part of a senior prank. Now they face criminal charges. Six of them are students, and one of them is an alumnus of the high school, presumably taking on the mentoring and intellectually nurturing role we see so rarely in this country’s schools. I look forward to the inevitable GoFundMe to support their legal defense, which may not even be necessary as no jury in America could possibly consider these young people criminals when they have such good ideas. One of the seniors — who, in fairness, will presumably never have to buy a drink in the town of Morganza, Maryland again — will not be allowed to walk at graduation. [Associated Press]


More than 100,000 taxpayers

A group of hackers described by authorities as a sophisticated organized crime syndicate stole upwards of 100,000 U.S. taxpayers’ information through the IRS’s “Get Transcript” function. Thieves getting fraudulent refunds is a huge issue. The IRS estimates it paid out $5.8 billion in faked refunds in 2013. [Associated Press]


$160,000

The academic fraud that began with a retracted study about the persuasiveness of gay marriage canvassers may also have extended to the study’s funders. There is mounting evidence that the UCLA graduate student behind the cooked books may have also lied about funding for his research from several foundations that had not in fact sponsored his research. The biggest so far is a claimed $160,000 from the Jay and Rose Phillips Family Foundation of Minnesota that reportedly did not actually happen. [New York Magazine]

$656 million

The real money in the beekeeping business isn’t in the honey game — the U.S. bee market made $283 million from that in 2012 — it’s all about the pollination, where about 85 percent of the market is fertilizing almond groves. Beekeepers hauled in $656 million in 2012 renting out their hives to farms, orchards and groves. [Mother Jones]



2 billion






That’s how many videos are watched daily on Snapchat by 13 to 34 year olds, according to Snapchat, which has an interest in saying 2 billion videos are watched daily on Snapchat by 13 to 34 year olds. It also says 60 percent of smartphone users in that age group are active users of the service. [Bloomberg]


$6.9 billion 

That’s how much money the international electronic music business made last year. It’s 12 percent higher than 2013 despite stagnation in sales of records and festival attendance. [Thump]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
8 months

Former prime minister of Israel Ehud Olmert received a sentence of eight months in jail Monday after being convicted of fraud. It can be appealed. [The New York Times]


14 years
When commemorating Memorial Day on Monday, President Obama pointed out that it was, for the first time in 14 years, a celebration of the holiday while the U.S. was not involved in a ground war. To put it another way: there are freshmen in high school for whom this Memorial Day is different than any other. [Reuters]


22 schools
The public school system in Chicago completely forgot about 22 of its schools when building a hiring estimate for a janitorial contract. The oversight cost the district an additional $7 million annually on a contract that only cost $64 million in the first year. [Chicago Sun Times]

43-47 dolphins

The Maui dolphin is the smallest marine dolphin in the world, and the estimated population of the creature has dipped below 50. The dolphin is only found off the coast of New Zealand and could be extinct within 15 years. Only 10 of the 43 to 47 estimated dolphins are mature females, which appears to present a logistical problem for, you know, repopulating the species. [BBC]


60 percent of patients
That’s the upper bound of the percentage of patients who looked for a second opinion on a doctor’s diagnosis and received one that was a major change from what they had before. A Gallup Poll from five years ago, however, found 70 percent of Americans hadn’t seen the need for a second opinion. [Los Angeles Times]

 62 percent

Huge news out of Ireland, where citizens voted 62 percent to 38 percent to approve a referendum legalizing same-sex marriage. The nation — which only decriminalized homosexuality in 1993! — saw an even faster shift in public opinion than the U.S. did in the past 10 years. [FiveThirtyEight]

20,000

That’s about how many people are currently employed by Malaysia Airlines. The company is going to lay off about a third of those employees and restructure itself into a new company, hoping to shed the reputation of its two major air disasters that occurred within a five month period. [Reuters]

69.3 million euros


That’s how much the Vatican bank made in net income last year, about 24 times as much as the bank made the previous year when it was trying to clean up corruption inside the bank. [New York Times Dealbook] 



$200 million

That’s how much the company behind “dating service” Ashley Madison is looking to raise by going public. I put “dating service” in scare quotes there mostly because it is a site designed to facilitate affairs. If they pull off the fundraising round it would make Avid Life Media — the company that owns Ashley Madison — a billion dollar company. [BBC]



$55.1 billion





After a bid from Comcast earlier this year was spiked by the feds, Time Warner Cable is making a deal with Charter Communications, which will buy it for $55.1 billion. The acquisition would make Charter the second biggest cable company by subscribers, only topped by Comcast. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Super special thanks to Oliver Roeder for filling in last week while I was on vacation, be sure to follow him @Ollie. If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me at @WaltHickey.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
10 top candidates

According to The New York Times, there are 18-and-counting likely Republican presidential candidates. Not wanting, apparently, to turn the first presidential debate into a Rockettes tribute act, Fox News and CNN are limiting the participants to the top 10 candidates, determined by a national polling average. And not to bury the lede too deeply: CNN will also host an undercard debate featuring the not-top-10 who get at least 1 percent in the polls. Must-see TV. [FiveThirtyEight]

40,000 years
How long — 280,000 in dog years — dogs have been man’s best friend, according to a new analysis of an ancient Siberian wolf bone. This is, as if you didn’t already know, sometime during the Upper Paleolithic — the age of wall paintings of horses and people first inhabiting Japan. [The Telegraph]

$174,692 a week
The average weekly wage per player for French soccer team Paris Saint-Germain, the highest of any team in any sport. Eight of the top 10 are soccer clubs. This also beat out the Los Angeles Dodgers’ $154,292 and the New York Yankees’ $140,566. It was enough to win Paris Saint-Germain its third straight Ligue 1 title, thank goodness. [ESPN FC]

$350,000 hunting license
The amount a man paid to kill a black rhinoceros in Namibia. The man successfully killed the black rhino early this week. The man’s name is Corey Knowlton. The man is from Texas. There are fewer than 5,000 of the animals on the planet, but Knowlton claimed this particular rhino was a problem — it was too old to breed and killed other rhinos in fits of jealous rage. [Speaking of Science]


2.75 million dead

The number of Mitt Romney voters who will no longer be with us come the 2016 election. Similarly, according to an analysis of exit polls and Census mortality data, 2.3 million of President Obama’s voters will have died, giving Democrats a 453,000 “advantage.” Either that, or they’ll be haunted by 453,000 additional ghosts. [Politico Magazine]

3.3 million years old

If you thought dogs have been pets for a long time, hoo boy have I got a digit for you. We’ve been making tools for days! Some stone tools found in Kenya are 3.3 million years old — 700,000 years older than any previous find. The tools are sharp blades, but what exactly they were used for is unknown. [The New York Times]




5.3 million youths


Youth participation in baseball in 2013, down from 8.8 million in 2000. This also worries Major League Baseball. “The biggest predictor of fan avidity as an adult is whether you played the game,” MLB commissioner Rob Manfred said. [The Wall Street Journal]


$2.4 billion a year


On paper, jails cost New York City $1.1 billion a year. But the true number is over double that — $2.4 billion according to a report from the Vera Institute of Justice. The “hidden” costs included “benefits for jail employees, medical care for inmates, and administrative services.” Some 12 million people are admitted to America’s jails each year. [BuzzFeed News]


3.5 billion views





The total views of the videos of Joseph Garrett — nom du jeu Stampy — a Minecraft celebrity on YouTube. This edges out even Lady Gaga for total views. So we’re clear: A YouTube Minecraft video is, essentially, a video of a stranger playing with digital Lego’s. [The New York Times]

13 trillion electron volts

The Large Hadron Collider particle accelerator is being cranked up to 11! Well, to 13 trillion actually. After generating evidence of the Higgs boson — and a couple of Nobel Prizes in the process — at half that energy, physicists at the LHC are now searching for dark matter. Is that not what happened to Doctor Manhattan? [CBS News]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
This is my Significant Digits swan song. Tweet love notes and hate mail to @Ollie. Next week we resume our regularly scheduled programming, so tweet your juicy digits to my main man, @WaltHickey.


