



You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 percent
The FDA announced plans to lift its lifetime ban on blood donation from men who have had sex with other men. It will soon propose replacing the ban with a subsequent ban on blood from men who have had sex with men within a year of donating. The change could increase the U.S. blood supply by 2 percent. [The Washington Post]


9 players
Number of Denver Broncos players selected for the Pro Bowl, the most of any team. Peyton Manning, who has fewer Super Bowl victories than his brother Eli, was selected for the Pro Bowl for the 14th time. Meanwhile, each one of the triumphant New York Giants were exempted from this burdensome game, giving Odell Beckham Jr. ample time to practice without distraction. Go Giants. [ESPN]


10.8 months
The average employee tenure at a startup company, compared to 17.5 months at a non-startup company. More than half of the employees at analyzed startups — which are defined as venture capital-funded companies less than 10 years old — are younger than 30 years old. [Quartz]


39 college bowl games
This year will see a record 39 college bowl games. I’d like to elaborate more here, but I went to The College of William & Mary and was born after 1970 so I’ve never had reason to know what a college bowl game is. [FiveThirtyEight]


57 percent of Cuban-Americans
Percent born in Cuba, compared to 68 percent in 2000. The shifting composition of Cuban-Americans could be one reason why a majority of Cuban-Americans opposed the U.S. embargo policy. [Pew Research Center]


61 school districts
Number of Mississippi school districts with open desegregation orders, the highest of any state in the nation. Some U.S. districts are required to increase the integration of black and Latino students, and some districts have had those orders open since the 1950s. [ProPublica]


100 percent
An analysis of 21 “best movies of 2014” lists found that every one of them had director Richard Linklater’s “Boyhood” on the list. [FiveThirtyEight]


2,000 jobs
As part of a plan to cut $3 billion from its budget, Coca-Cola intends to cut up to 2,000 jobs globally. It’s the largest cut at the company in 15 years. [Business Insider]


1 million medical tourists
The South Korean government is expecting a substantial increase in medical tourism, an industry which is dominated by plastic surgery. Last year South Korea had 211,218 medical tourists, and the nation expects 1 million per year by 2020. [The New York Times]


6.6 million coffee machines
Keurig Green Mountain is recalling upwards of 6.6 million Mini Plus Brewing Systems that can apparently overheat and spray water during brewing. They’ve received around 90 reports of burn-related injuries so far. [NBC News]

We’re off for a few days; catch you next Monday and thanks for reading. If you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. In the meantime, have a happy Christmas.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5 years old
The peak age for belief in Santa Claus, according to University of Texas psychologist Jacqueline Woolley, with just over 80 percent of five-year-olds trusting in St. Nick. [The Atlantic]

27 percent of U.S. electricity
Following New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s decision last week to ban hydraulic fracking, the safety of natural gas is once again in the spotlight. Natural gas is currently responsible for 27 percent of U.S. electricity generation, and the number is rising in part because of fracking projects. Some environmentalists are concerned. [The New York Times]

40 percent of Americans
Federal guidelines indicate that 1.5 ounces of nuts per day is linked to a reduced risk of heart attack, but the CDC reported that only 40 percent of adults ate nuts on a given day, with older people eating substantially more nuts than younger people. I’m taking this news to heart, and from now on will eat Nutella like it’s yogurt. [Washington Post]

51 percent approval
New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and the NYPD don’t share many supporters. While both the mayor and the police department enjoyed 47 percent and 51 percent job approval ratings, respectively, individual subgroups — by borough or race — suggest the support is inverse. De Blasio’s “tale of two cities” campaign slogan still holds true. [FiveThirtyEight]

81 percent
That’s the percent of non-Christians who celebrate the holiday of Christmas. Among nonbelievers — those who describe themselves as atheist, agnostic, or “nothing in particular” — 87 percent celebrate the holiday. [Pew Research Center]

1,024 official IP adresses
North Korea lost access to the internet yesterday for about ten hours, inconveniencing a handful of people. The country has 1,024 official internet protocol addresses (and potentially a few more unofficial ones). That’s fewer than the number of IP addresses on many blocks in New York City. [The New York Times]

$60,000
How much Long Island man Sammy Nahas says he has spent on Christmas decorations in the past year. He estimated he’s spent over $100,000 in the past three years. [Time Magazine]

850,000 kids
The estimate for the number of children who visited a Santa Claus in the post-Thanksgiving weekend, according to International Council of Shopping Centers trade group. Of people who went to the mall to see Santa, 70 percent reported they would also do some shopping. [Bloomberg News]

$322 million
Victims of Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi scheme are set to receive a new round of payouts totaling $322 million, bringing the total restitution to around $7.2 billion. That’s about half of the lost principal. [Bloomberg News]

$7.5 billion
When the Castro regime nationalized the assets of foreign companies operating within Cuban borders in 1959, American companies filed claims worth $1.9 billion with the U.S. government’s Foreign Claims Settlement Division. Those claims are worth upwards of $7.5 billion today and are no doubt on companies’ radars now that the U.S. and Cuba are defrosting. [Talking Points Memo]

See a significant digit out in the wild? Tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
11 days in the wild
The amount of time a family of three — Steven Van Lonkhuyzen and his two sons, aged 7 and 5 — survived while lost in an Australian National Park. Someone on a motorcycle found them when they had only a few slices of bread left. [The Guardian]

14 confrontations
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has engaged in at least 14 raised-voice confrontations with regular people since 2010, usually at town hall meetings. Aides said the governor has held 127 town halls across the state, so if we assume for a second that all of them happened at town halls, it puts the odds of a confrontation breaking out at roughly 11 percent. That’s a threat level somewhere between a guy cutting you off on the Turnpike and a Jets home win. [The Washington Post]

15 percent of marriages
There’s been a huge jump in multiracial marriages recently, which make up 15 percent of recent unions. In 2010, that number was 8.4 percent; in 1960, 0.4 percent. [Brookings Institute]

97 percent of teams
That’s the proportion of 9-3 NFL teams that eventually made the playoffs in the last 24 years. The Eagles, who were 9-3 three weeks ago, were eliminated from playoff contention yesterday. [FiveThirtyEight]

20 million cats and dogs
People in Japan take holiday pet presents seriously, showering their furry friends with luxury goods and even vacations. The nation has only 16 million people under the age of 15 but 20 million cats and dogs. [The Washington Post]

90 deaths per day
U.S. traffic fatalities were down in 2013, with 32,719 people dying in car accidents compared to 33,782 in 2012. [Associated Press]

600 factories
In China, the village of Yiwu is responsible for manufacturing 60 percent of the world’s Christmas decorations. The 600 factories produce everything from plastic snowflakes to the felt Santa hats adorning our drunkest SantaCon attendees. [The Guardian]

$27.5 million
Following allegations that the company over-billed the U.S. government, Lockheed Martin will pay the feds $27.5 million. The defense contractor is said to have overcharged the feds for work performed by people who were unqualified. A lesser column would seize this opportunity to make a joke about Congress. [Reuters]

34 million packages
UPS will deliver that many packages on Monday, the most it has ever delivered. Last year around this time, UPS bungled the delivery of millions of packages, prompting it to spend $500 million on system upgrades in advance of this year. [The Wall Street Journal]

$4 billion per year
Economics professor Joel Waldfogel estimated that poorly chosen gifts caused between $4 billion and $13 billion annually in economic waste. [The New York Times]
See a significant digit out in the wild? Tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (Dec. 22, 5:18 p.m.): This post originally misspelled Joel Waldfogel’s first name.


--------------------------------


Welcome to the fourth edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2.5 times as likely to die
Main characters in children’s cartoons were 2.5 times as likely to die as the main characters of films aimed at adults, a study found. They were also three times as likely to be murdered, and parents in particular were five times as likely to die in animated films. I look forward to the second season of “Serial” trying to exonerate Roger Rabbit in the murder of Marvin Acme. [UCL]

13 hours
Amount of time a New Zealand couple was reportedly stuck in their car. The pair did not realize that they could exit the Mazda 3, as it featured keyless entry and they didn’t have their transmitter. [The New Zealand Herald]

“25 to 30 percent”
That’s Russian President Vladimir Putin’s estimate for how much of Russia’s economic difficulties are because of U.S.-led sanctions. [The Washington Post]

27.7 percent
That’s the average obesity rate of U.S. workers. The occupation group with the highest rate — 40.7 percent — was police officers, firefighters and security guards. [The Wall Street Journal]

47 percent increase
Desktop search queries on Amazon increased 47 percent between September 2013 and September 2014, which could be bad news for Google. Commercial searches make up 20 percent of queries on the search engine, and losing market share to direct searches on Amazon could hurt the company’s largest business. [Business Insider]

$2,500 worth of prison calls
That’s the estimate for how much Sarah Koenig’s Serial podcast might have spent talking with Adnan Syed in the Maryland correctional facility. The top rate for telephone calls to prisons in 2013 was 89 cents per minute, plus a charge of $3.95 per call. [Bloomberg Businessweek]

1.6 million mishandled bags
In the first nine months of 2014, 1.6 million reports of mishandled baggage were sent by airlines to the Department of Transportation. The biggest offender was Envoy Air, a subsidiary of American Airlines, which had about 9 complaints per 1,000 passengers. [The Washington Post]

3.5 million fewer Justin Bieber fans
In what’s being referred to as the “Instagram Rapture,” the photo sharing company is cracking down and deleting spam accounts. As a result, some celebrities are seeing their follower counts fall by the millions. Bieber’s follower count dropped by 3.5 million, and rapper Ma$e reportedly lost so many followers — dropping from 1.6 million fans to a mere 100,000 in 20 minutes — that he has deleted his account entirely. [Business Insider]

$20 million
How much billionaire investor Carl Icahn has said he would spend to keep the bankrupt Trump Taj Mahal casino in Atlantic City open. Talks to avert the Saturday closing have fallen apart between the investor and the casino workers’ union. [The Philadelphia Inquirer]

(409)-935-XXXX
That’s the (deliberately obscured) number of a Texas City, Texas plumber who has been inundated with phone calls after a photo of one of his company’s former vehicles hit the internet. The truck, which says “Mark-1 Plumbing” on the side along with the phone number, now has an anti-aircraft gun in the bed and is allegedly being used by Islamic State militants. The plumber says he has no idea how the vehicle ended up in Syria. [Galveston Daily News]
See a significant digit out in the wild? Tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


Welcome to the third edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re experimenting with it, so let us know what you think.
1 percent of iPhones
That’s the Russian share of iPhones sold worldwide in 2013, 1.57 million of 153.4 million total. It’s not much overall, but currency fluctuations prompted Apple to suspend online sales in Russia. [Wired]

6.6 times the median
The median net worth of upper-income families is 6.6 times greater than the median wealth of middle-income families. That’s the widest gap in 30 years. [Pew Research Center]

$35 per month
AMC theaters — seemingly inspired by Netflix, Hulu Plus and The Olive Garden — is testing a subscription service called MoviePass. It will allow people who pay $35 per month to see one movie per day. If it’s similar to HBO Go at all, I plan to use my roommate’s ex-girlfriend’s parents’ MoviePass for the foreseeable future. [Denver Post]

93 percent discount
Nine works of art stolen six years ago were recovered by the LAPD. Despite the art being worth about $10 million, the person who had it was trying to sell it for $700,000. That’s a bargain that should stoke any serious collector’s FOMO. [Los Angeles Times]

37,924 wannabe lawyers
Law school enrollment has sunk to its lowest total since 1973. There are 37,924 full- and part-time law students starting classes in 2014, a 30 percent drop from the 52,488 enrollees in 2010. [The New York Times]

5 million kids
UNICEF estimates that 5 million children between the ages of 3 and 17 are not in school as a result of Ebola. [Time Magazine]

$75 million settlement
A federal judge rejected a $75 million class-action settlement for NCAA athletes who suffer from debilitating effects of head injuries. Both sides will now have to find new terms they can agree upon that will also satisfy the judge. [Associated Press]

100 million cups of coffee per year
Royal Dutch Shell sold 100 million cups of joe at its gas stations last year. As oil prices decline, Shell plans to expand its station network, in part so it can better peddle the other kind of fuel. [Bloomberg News]

$114 million
What comparable films to “The Interview” — which Sony scuttled yesterday due to threats against theatergoers — made, on average, at the box office since 2001. [FiveThirtyEight]

$8.65 billion loss in 48 hours
That’s the amount that 15 of Russia’s richest people lost Monday and Tuesday as the ruble fell to its lowest value in a decade. The figure is based on estimates of net worth from Bloomberg’s Billionaires index. [Vanity Fair]
See a significant digit out in the wild? Tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


Welcome to the second edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re experimenting with it, so let us know what you think.
0.09 bitcoin
Time magazine announced that it would begin to accept payment for subscriptions in the digital currency bitcoin. A one year, $30 print subscription would cost about 0.09 BTC based on yesterday’s prices. It’s always touching when two volatile and uncertain business models find each other. [The New York Times]


15 percent of the vote
That’s the percentage of Republican voters who would back former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush in a presidential primary if former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney doesn’t run. Bush leads a Romney-less field, and yesterday announced his intention to form an exploratory committee to look into running for the presidency. [The Washington Post]


26 percent good news
The nation’s perception of its job situation appears to be improving: 26 percent of Americans reported hearing good news about jobs compared to 25 percent who heard bad news. That’s the first time good news beat bad news in five years. [Pew Research Center]


90 days of free mail
Just one of many perks enjoyed by former members of the U.S. Congress. In addition to being entitled to taxpayer-funded mail (through something called the “franking privilege,”), former House members can continue to use the parking lot, the member’s dining room and the gym, albeit the latter has a fee. [The Washington Post]


294 mistakenly accepted freshman
Johns Hopkins University mistakenly told 294 applicants they were accepted to the prestigious university when they had actually been denied. The cringeworthy error places Hopkins in good company: Fordham University, Vassar College and The University of California at San Diego have all erroneously admitted students in the last few years. [The Washington Post]


$550 less on gasoline
The average U.S. household is expected to spend $1,962 on gasoline next year, about $550 less than this year. That forecast is the lowest level in 11 years. [U.S. Energy Information Administration]


1,000 tons of frozen french fries
McDonalds is running out of french fries in Japan due to labor disputes at U.S. ports, leading to rationing and size limits beginning Wednesday. McDonalds has taken emergency measures and airlifted 1,000 tons of fries in, with a subsequent plan to ship over another 1,600 tons in January. Please keep the people of Japan in your thoughts and prayers in this difficult time. [The Washington Post]


7,000 body cameras
Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti announced a plan to purchase 7,000 body cameras for the LAPD, enough for most of the department’s 9,900 officers. [Los Angeles Times]


$10,000 starting bid
That’s the starting bid for one of the Army’s 4,000 surplus Humvees, which are on sale to the general public starting Wednesday. It’s an exceptional choice if you were disgusted by the earlier item about Americans saving $550 on gasoline next year. [Jalopnik]


925 million gallons
Forecasted consumption of orange juice this fiscal year, the lowest since at least 1996 and the eighth decline in 10 years. [Bloomberg News]
See a significant digit out in the wild? Tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


Editor’s note: This is the first edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re experimenting with it, so let us know what you think.
1.66 cents
Cost to produce one penny, according to the U.S. Mint. While coin costs are falling, nickels also come in over face value, costing 8.09 cents to produce. That’s more than the 5.4 cent cost of printing a dollar bill. [Washington Post]

17 percent
The Central Bank of Russia announced a major rate hike yesterday, raising the main deposit rate from 10.5 percent to 17 percent. The country relies substantially on oil revenues, and the recent drop in the price of crude hasn’t helped the economy, which is seeing low growth and high inflation. [New York Times]

30 percent of the planet’s natural gas
The North Pole has been claimed by Denmark, and with it the vast gas reserves locked up beneath the Arctic sea bed. Denmark — the small European nation that lucked into Greenland a while back — competes with Canada, Russia, Norway and the U.S. over the Arctic, which has an estimated 15 percent of the planet’s remaining oil and 30 percent of its natural gas reserves. [Business Insider]

$49 per pound
Cost of handmade Vermont butter that just went on sale at Saxelby Cheesemongers. Until now, Animal Farm butter was served almost exclusively at restaurants Per Se and The French Laundry, and now you, too, can buy a pound of it with all your leftover milk money. [Grub Street]

65 percent of U.S. adults
A majority of Americans believe the biblical Christmas story (as Pew puts it, “the virgin birth, the journey of the magi, the angel’s announcement to the shepherds and the manger story”) reflects historical events. Among Christians, the number of believers is over 80 percent. [Pew Center]

88 percent of Los Angeles’s water
LA gets almost 90 percent of its water from three aqueducts. These three aqueducts — which sustain 22 million Southern Californians — cross the San Andreas fault 32 times. LA Mayor Eric Garcetti thinks this may be a problem. [LA Times]

150,000 tourists
In 2012, the story of a botched restoration of a Spanish church’s fresco of Jesus went viral. In the intervening years since the retouching, the town of Borgia has seen a renaissance of tourism. The image has attracted 150,000 tourists to the small city, and visitors can pay one euro to glimpse the simian portrait. [New York Times]

10 million dead oysters
Ostreid herpesvirus-1, an oyster herpes virus that can have a 100 percent mortality rate, is sweeping the seas, putting the $4 billion shellfish industry at risk. The virus killed 10 million Australian oysters in a mere three days. [Bloomberg]

$72 million in fake money
This week, New York magazine reported that a high school senior made $72 million investing in the stock market while still in school. Now he’s come clean and admitted he hasn’t made a dime. [New York Observer]

$349 million
Cost of a NASA laboratory tower designed to test a new rocket engine. The rocket it was designed for was canceled in 2010, and the facility is now mothballed. Space, it turns out, is expensive. [Washington Post]
CORRECTION (Dec. 19, 5:43 p.m.): An item in this article originally misidentified The French Laundry as a restaurant in New York. It is located in Yountville, California.
