
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
0.5 percent per year
Credit-rating agency Standard & Poor’s has downgraded Russia’s sovereign debt to junk levels, forecasting growth of merely 0.5 percent per year over the next three years. [The New York Times]

89 percent
Percentage of people who sent pro-marijuana messages on Twitter who are under the age of 25, according to a Washington University in St. Louis study of 7.6 million tweets. People 25 and older presumably have learned to keep that ish on the down low. [Pacific Standard Magazine]

96.4 percent
Percentage of amputations related to snowblower injuries — caused by sticking a portion of your body (mostly the fingers) into a snowblower while it’s still running — where the victim was male. [The Washington Post]

$15,000
Value of a statue of a bare-chested Celtic god of the sea, described as a “6-foot-tall striking local male with an athletic build,” missing from a Northern Irish town. Guys, I’m right here. [The New York Times]

$352,154.53
Estimate of how much American Airlines could save in yearly fuel costs by flying without Sky Mall catalogs weighing down its planes, assuming there are 37.5 pounds of Sky Malls on every American 737 hopping around the skies. It takes fuel, however little, to lug every pound to 35,000 feet on each flight, and that can add up in the aggregate. [Wired]

$9.2 million
Denmark plans to spend 60.9 million kroner, or roughly $9.2 million, over the next three years on programs aimed at de-radicalizing Islamic extremists. Most of the money will go to efforts to prevent young people from joining radical groups. [Associated Press]

40 million
Since 1996, the number of tourists visiting Times Square every year has doubled to 40 million. As a result, companies attempting to accomplish actual things — such as the publisher Condé Nast and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom — are fleeing the seething hellhole of a neighborhood. [The New York Times]

$921 million
In the era of “freemium” apps, extra content is where the real money is. Games developer Electronic Arts saw a whopping 24 percent year-over-year growth in revenue derived from this extra content for its games, such as add-on levels or other downloadable content. The developer took in $921 million in revenue from extras, compared to $420 million from full-game digital downloads. [Polygon]


11.2 billion years old
Scientists believe they have found a 11.2 billion-year-old star with five Earth-sized planets orbiting it. Our own sun is only about 4.5 billion years old. [Iowa State University]

$18 billion
Apple announced $18 billion in profit in the last quarter, the most profit of any company in history over a single quarter. [BBC, h/t @Bazaarbrett]

One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
4 years
Thelma, a python, spent four years living the single life in a zoo in Louisville, Kentucky, but somehow managed to wind up pregnant and lay more than 61 eggs. Scientists say the snake had a virgin birth, and that female-only reproduction is far more common than we realized. [BBC]

5.5 percent
Films released in January account for an average of 5.5 percent of the annual total gross for wide-release films, making January the second-lowest grossing month after September. This means that movies that come out this month typically aren’t very good, and films are going to be bad for a few more months. [FiveThirtyEight]

12 percent
A Hunter College analysis of petitions for guardianship found that 12 percent of 700 cases filed in Manhattan were brought by nursing homes against their patients. Pursuing the costly litigation to gain guardianship of their elderly patients — and full legal powers and complete financial control over them — is a strategy some nursing homes use as a means of bill collection. [The New York Times]

12.5 percent
Listeners who noted a distinct similarity between Sam Smith’s 2014 song “Stay With Me” and Tom Petty’s 1989 tune “I Wont Back Down” have had their suspicions confirmed with news that Smith and Petty have settled out of court over owed royalties. Petty and singer-composer Jeff Lynne now have a 12.5 percent songwriting credit on “Stay With Me.” [Consequence of Sound]


16 percent decrease
Ratings for the NFL Pro Bowl, which I’m told happened Sunday, were down 16 percent from last year. [Sports Media Watch]

477 percent
Alcohol-delivery app Drizly said orders were up 477 percent on Monday in New York City and Boston compared to a typical Monday, as people gathered essentials ahead of a forecasted blizzard. [Business Insider]

600 plows
In case you haven’t heard, the East Coast got a little snow Monday night. Earlier on Monday the New York State Department of Transportation announced plans to activate 600 out of a total 1,444 available snow plows to handle the storm. [NY.gov]

$6 million
Should Alex Rodriguez hit six more home runs for the Yankees — to tie Willie Mays’s career total — he’ll get a $6 million bonus, and a further $6 million for each subsequent player he passes on the home-run list. (And remember, the Say Hey Kid got his number without substantial and systemic steroid abuse.) The Yankees are not enthusiastic about paying Rodriguez, who was suspended last year for using performance-enhancing drugs. [New York Daily News]

$899 million
The political network controlled by conservative industrialists Charles and David Koch announced its intention to spend $899 million on the 2016 campaign. For perspective, the Republican National Committee and its congressional campaign committees spent $657 million total in 2012. [The New York Times]

One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
$2.04
Average price of a gallon of gasoline in the U.S. on Friday, down $1.25 from a year ago. In many places, a gallon is less than $2, but the national average is dragged north by more expensive gas in Hawaii and Alaska. [Associated Press]

3.6 feet
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory wants to fly helicopters on Mars, but achieving flight in the thin Martian atmosphere presents a tricky engineering problem. So far, scientists are experimenting with a helicopter prototype the size of a box of tissues, but the real deal would have a wingspan of 3.6 feet and would be equipped with a camera, to act as a scout for NASA’s rovers. [Vice]

26.9 inches
The current record for snowfall in New York City, a record that may very well be threatened as a colossal storm makes its way east early this week. As the city braces for the blizzard, area supermarkets basically look like something out of “The Purge” and my roommates are appearing to tire of me yelling “your Tauntaun will freeze before you reach the first marker!” every time they leave the apartment. [FiveThirtyEight]

75 percent
In order to say that your cabernet sauvignon is from Napa Valley, at least 75 percent of it must come from Napa cabernet grapes, with another 10 percent from Napa grapes of other varieties, but less than 15 percent from grapes from anywhere else in California, where wine is substantially cheaper. The Hill Wine Company flouted those rules, and many others, and now its owner is in a whole bunch of trouble with the government. [The New York Times]

80 percent
Brazil promised to cut the flow of raw sewage, pollutants and garbage into Guanabara Bay, outside Rio de Janeiro, by 80 percent in order to make the water safe for the sailing and wind surfing competitions at the 2016 Olympics. That’s not going to happen. [Associated Press]

$25,000
An unidentified buyer paid a Fort Worth, Texas, history buff $25,000 for a lock of Abraham Lincoln’s hair at an auction Saturday. It’s unclear whether the individual is a hair enthusiast, a Lincoln enthusiast, or some disconcerting combination of the two. [Reuters]

$4.1 million
The opening weekend take for Johnny Depp’s “Mortdecai” was just $4.1 million, his fifth consecutive opening weekend bomb. [Business Insider]

57 million
Dish Network was found guilty of breaking telemarking rules on 57 million occasions, in many cases calling people on the federal “Do Not Call” registry. Penalties can be up to $16,000 per outbound call, which could hypothetically put the satellite company on the hook for $912 billion. A trial is scheduled for July, but would any jury in America fail to put a telemarketer up against the wall if it had the chance? [CBS News via Slashdot]

$100,471,452.77
A mystery buyer has dropped nearly $100.5 million on a duplex penthouse in Manhattan’s new One57 skyscraper, making the sale the first to break the $100 million barrier in New York City. [The New York Times]

140 million people
As much as 80 percent of the population of Pakistan lost power on Sunday after an attack on a key power line. [Sky News]


One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Today also marks the fourth edition of the Significant Digits newsletter! If you’d rather not click on a website to read this, sign up here.
2.3 years
Average age difference for an American heterosexual couple. [FiveThirtyEight]

3.5 hours
Apple is working on meeting battery expectations for its forthcoming Apple Watch. Reports indicate that the watch battery can handle up to 3.5 hours of standard app use and up to 2.5 hours of heavy application use, like gameplay. [9to5mac]

4 casinos
Atlantic City saw four casinos close and 8,000 people lose their jobs last year, an economic mess that could lead to the city’s property tax base falling from $11.3 billion to $8 billion by 2016. As a result of this, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie signed an executive order to install an emergency management team for the city. [NJ.com]

63 months
Barrett Brown, a former journalist and member of the Anonymous hacktivist movement, was sentenced to 63 months in prison for linking to stolen data from intelligence contractor Stratfor in 2011. [The Guardian]


328 televison shows
In 2014, at least 328 original television shows aired on broadcast, cable or streaming networks, according to FX Networks’ research department. The breakdown: 124 aired on broadcast televsion, 180 on cable and 24 on streaming networks. [Vulture]

500 jobs
DreamWorks Animation will cut 500 jobs and restructure its film business after an underwhelming 2014. They intend to produce two films — one a sequel to an existing franchise, another an original film — per year, down from three per year. I hope you like animals who are also good at Kung Fu. [MarketWatch]

$700,000 in bribes and kickbacks
Prosecutors have outlined the allegations against New York State Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, alleging that he accepted $700,000 in bribes and kickbacks from a real estate law firm and that he illegitimately made more than $5.3 million in salary and referral fees from law firm Weitz & Luxenberg. Silver was arrested on corruption charges Thursday. [The New York Times]

$4.5 million
This year there will be 15 first-time advertisers during the Super Bowl, a prestigious but expensive television platform for #brands looking to make an impression on consumers. The average price of a 30-second ad this year is $4.5 million. [The Wall Street Journal]

1.9 billion pounds
The U.S. is all about avocados these days, with 1.9 billion pounds of Hass avocados sold in the U.S. in 2014. That’s about 4.5 billion avocados, more than double the amount consumed on 2005. The moral of this story is that if you want Americans to eat a fruit or a vegetable, you first have to find one that actually has saturated fat in it. [The Washington Post]

$8.7 billion
An $8.7 billion buyout offer from Dollar Tree has been approved by Family Dollar shareholders. For some perspective, that’s the equivalent of about 8.7 billion products from Dollar Tree or Family Dollar. [The Wall Street Journal]

One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Today also marks the third edition of the Significant Digits newsletter! If you’d rather not click on a website to read this, sign up here.
4.17 times the barley
The USDA has found that craft brewers on average use 4.17 times as much barley as brews from U.S. beer giants InBev and MillerCoors. Non-craft beer brewers use an average of 16.5 pounds of barley per barrel, while craft beer producers use a whopping 68.7 pounds per barrel. [USDA via Mother Jones]

7 protesters
Seven protestors were escorted out of the Supreme Court building as Chief Justice John Roberts prepared to announce the day’s opinions. The protesters cut off the justice, yelling, “We are the 99 percent” and appeared to criticize the 2010 Citizens United decision. [CNN]

75 percent
A WBUR poll showed that 75 percent of Boston residents want a public referendum on whether the city should host the Olympic Games. The quadrennial event, in which an international committee identifies a city that is willing to hand over billions of dollars, also involves sports. [New York Times]

2,400 positions
EBay Inc. is cutting 7 percent of its workforce after weak holiday sales and a revenue that fell short of expectations. [Bloomberg]

$50,000
Cost estimate of damage inflicted on a ski resort by a single University of Michigan fraternity in one weekend. A hallway’s worth of ceiling tiles was destroyed, rooms were wrecked, shattered glass and debris coated the floor and there was substantial furniture damage. The chapter has accepted full responsibility. Two other fraternities reportedly did damage to another hotel as well. In fairness, it seems like it was a pretty sick party. [9 and 10 news via Business Insider]

$294,038
In a marketing stunt, the publisher of James Patterson’s newest novel “Private Vegas” is selling a single copy of the book that is rigged to self-destruct within 24 hours. The price tag includes dinner with Patterson and a bomb squad to handle the detonation of the book, which will presumably take place in front of one of our nation’s many underfunded libraries. [Business Insider]

745,000 miles
Distance between Earth — where the vast majority of humans are located — and an asteroid a third of a mile across on Jan. 26, the closest predicted asteroid fly-by until 2027. [Mercury News]

1 million copies
The book “The Boy Who Came Back From Heaven,” which claimed to outline the experiences of a boy who came back from heaven, is alleged to have been fabricated. The book — which was written by the boy’s father, with little input from his son — sold upwards of 1 million copies, but has been pulled from shelves by the publisher following the claim. [The Guardian]

30 million unique visitors
That’s the reported traffic to PAPER Magazine’s site when they posted a full-frontal nude image of Kim Kardashian. [Medium]

42,176,061,890
Aggregate pageviews of image board 4chan since its founding 11 and a half years ago. Founder Christopher Poole, known as “moot,” is retiring as the controversial site’s administrator. [4chan News]

One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Today also marks the second edition of the Significant Digits newsletter! If you’d rather not click on a website to read this, sign up here.
11 footballs
The NFL has found that 11 of 12 game balls used by the New England Patriots during Sunday’s AFC championship game were under-inflated, leading some to allege unfair play since doctoring footballs can provide a competitive advantage. [ESPN]

14 percent
Only 14 percent of legislative proposals pitched during President Obama’s 2014 State of the Union address have been enacted, up from a mere 5 percent in 2013 but far lower than in 2010. [FiveThirtyEight]

$24.99
Cost of the “Invisible Boyfriend” or “Invisible Girlfriend” service, an app designed to send you texts, calls and voicemails that help convince friends and family you’ve found love. Just under $25 gets you 100 texts, 10 voicemails and a handwritten note. [Business Insider]

64 percent
Percent of people who trust information from online search engines, a value that has for the first time eclipsed trust in traditional media sources, which is at 62 percent. [Quartz]

150 percent
The collapse of the Soviet Union may have led to a 150 percent increase in Russia’s gray wolf population in the following decade. Given his record with tigers, who knows how many wolves Putin’s taken down. [BBC]

350 miners
In Kosovo, 350 miners refused to return to the surface from their shift almost half a mile below ground, effectively beginning a subterranean strike. They’re protesting the government’s decision to back out of a plan that would have taken control of the bankrupt Trebka mining complex, [The New York Times]

6,000 feet per minute
The rate at which AirAsia Flight 8501 was climbing before it eventually crashed for unknown reasons, killing 162 people in December. Only fighter jets, according to Indonesia’s transport minister, normally climb at that rate. [Los Angeles Times]

39.11 million subscribers
Netflix earnings came out Tuesday, and the company exceeded Wall Street expectations, presumably because I elected to take a staycation in Q4 rather than go outside. The company announced that it ended the quarter with 39.11 million domestic and 18.28 international subscribers. That’s a whole lot of people thinking about finally getting into “Freaks and Geeks.” [Re/code]

$40 million
Amount “The Interview” has made from on-demand rentals. The film hits Netflix on Saturday. [CNN]

$100 million
FIFA, an organization that occasionally finds the time to plan some soccer games in between scandals, has set up a $100 million World Cup Legacy Fund for Brazil in an attempt to limit the negative impacts that hosting the event might have had on the nation. Brazil spent $15 billion on the 2014 FIFA World Cup. [Associated Press]

One more plea for the newsletter: Sign up for it now and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here.
9 women
Ava DuVernay is the ninth woman to be passed over for a best director nomination even though her film received a best picture Academy Award nomination. [@SpencerAlthouse]

21 percent lower
A study by the Pew Research Center found that heavy Internet and social media users did not report higher levels of stress. Indeed, among women stress levels were 21 percent lower for those who shared things on social. [Reuters]

39 percent
President Obama has proposed legislation to give workers seven days’ paid sick leave. About 39 percent of Americans do not receive paid sick leave. Regardless of your politics, it’s worth remembering that some of these people make your food. [The Washington Post]

69 percent

Proportion of New York City voters who disapprove of police officers turning their backs on Mayor Bill de Blasio. [Quinnipiac]


133 stores
Canada is poised to lose its 133 Target locations after the retailer decided to close the stores and lay off 17,600 employees. [Los Angeles Times]

300 couples
A judge ruled that the state of Michigan must recognize the marriages of 300 same-sex couples who wed last year. [Detroit Free Press]

$25,200
Kentucky workplace safety regulators fined a fire department $25,200 after one firefighter was killed by electrocution and three others were injured while they made an ALS ice bucket challenge video. [WAVE 3 News]

$5.86 million
The sum that a really popular, really stylish, pretty good iPhone game can make. [Polygon]

20 million square miles of ocean
Area affected by bottom trawlers scraping nets along the ocean floor, a process which has torn up vast areas of the continental shelf. [The New York Times]

$6 billion
Estimated cost of the Hyperloop, a high-speed train from Los Angeles to San Francisco, according to entrepreneur and proposer Elon Musk. Eighty-four bazillion. Eleventy six. “e.” I can also make up completely irrational numbers in my head without justification. [The New York Times]

Impress your friends! Beguile your enemies! Sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter now, and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. Literally the worst case scenario is you sound only slightly smarter at cocktail parties. Sign up here.
We’re off Monday. See you Tuesday. As always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here.
12 percent
GoPro stock is down 12 percent after it was reported that Apple has received patents for mounted digital cameras similar to GoPro’s, and that the patents specifically reference weaknesses in GoPro cameras. Presumably the company is kicking itself for not strapping a GoPro on the stock before it started to freefall. [Mashable]

13 percent more likely to drink
More money, more problems: People who work more than 48 hours per week are 13 percent more likely to engage in risky drinking than those working between 35 and 40 hours. [NPR]

16 percent of Republican men
Pew Research Center asked Americans if they hope the United States elects a female president in their lifetime. On the left, 69 percent of women and 46 percent of men indicated they hoped that would happen. On the right, 20 percent of women and a meager 16 percent of men agreed. [Pew Research Center]

32 percent down
The digital currency Bitcoin is in the middle of another crash, falling 32 percent in 2 days. One bitcoin went for $181.45 on Wednesday. Bitcoin was one the worst investments of 2014 — worse than the ruble or oil — losing 58 percent of its value. [Bloomberg]

40 percent
Proving that HBO’s “Girls” truly has its finger on the pulse of society, 40 percent of women between the ages of 20 and 24 have tried anal sex. [Vogue]

47 percent
President Obama’s approval rating, which is up 5 percentage points in the past month, according to the Pew Research Center. It’s roughly on par with Ronald Reagan’s at the same point in his presidency. [New York Times]

600 miles
Length of a wall Saudi Arabia plans to build along its border with Iraq. The wall is a combined fence and ditch, and had been discussed since 2006. As the power of the Islamic State in the region grows, Riyadh has sent 30,000 additional troops to the border. [Business Insider]

603 presents

Prince George, a well-known genetic lottery winner born into unimaginable wealth and privilege in July 2013, received 603 gifts from members of the Australian public. The gifts included clothing, books and sports equipment. I realize the kid could be king one day, but still, this is rather a lot of expectation to put on him. [The Telegraph]


4,074 uses of force
New York City corrections officers reported using force — ranging from pepper spray to punches — 4,074 times in 2014, an all-time high. [Associated Press]

$750,000
Reported cost of a one-day Snapchat ad. A masthead ad on YouTube goes for only about $500,000, and many advertisers are griping about Snapchat’s price. While we’re on the subject of costly decisions related to the ephemeral photo sharing app, I don’t know what exactly I sent to all of you last Friday at 1 a.m., but I am very curious why several of you screen-shotted it. [Adweek]


Impress your friends! Beguile your enemies! Sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter now, and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. Literally the worst case scenario is you sound only slightly smarter at cocktail parties. Sign up here.
As always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (Jan. 15, 9:57 a.m.): A previous version of this article misstated the source of 603 gifts received by Prince George. They came from people in Australia.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here. You want to be one of the first, right? 
$22
Amount of cash carried by the median American consumer, according to a study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The study also found that 5.2 percent of consumers carried one or more $100 bills, but it failed to determine why they were always holding up the line in front of me at Starbucks. [Bloomberg Businessweek]

40 percent
Mitt Romney’s “47 percent” of Americans who owe no federal income tax are now down to 40 percent. [Washington Post]

42 percent
Joseph Morrissey, a member of the Virginia Assembly, was re-elected to the House of Delegates with 42 percent of the vote. Morrissey, who first served as a Democrat, resigned from office after pleading guilty to a misdemeanor charge relating to his relationship with a 17-year-old receptionist, but promised to run as an independent in the special election. We’re two weeks into 2015 and Virginia politics is already having a rough year. [Washington Post]

45 percent
The Obama administration will announce new regulations on oil and gas methane emissions, with the goal of cutting the industry’s emissions of the greenhouse gas up to 45 percent by 2025. [New York Times]

62 percent completion rate
New data available from e-book readers allows publishers to determine how many people finish the books they start as well as when they put books down. Britons were most likely to finish a romance novel, with a 62 percent completion rate. [New York Review of Books]

73 percent of the Republican caucus

The Republican Study Committee, a conservative group of House Republicans, has seen substantial growth, with members accounting for 73 percent of the caucus in the 113th Congress, up from 7 percent in the 104th. Some conservative members, however, are reportedly planning an exodus to found another conservative caucus. [National Journal]


89 fires
Ohio State University fans tore down a goalpost and set 89 fires, mostly trash fires, after their team’s 42-20 win Monday in the College Football Playoff National Championship. Police responded with tear gas when fans tried to break their way into the stadium. [Baltimore Sun]

500,000 offspring
Antonio Cromartie is at it again!  A bull named Toystory who sired 500,000 offspring in more than 50 countries died last Thanksgiving. He holds the record for most units of semen sold, about 2.4 million, and at his peak he was making about nine deposits a week. [Wall Street Journal]

$2.3 million
Sale price of a penny at a Florida auction. The penny was pretty old, and rather rare, so I suppose the decision made sense at the time. Still, even if you had a penny that was scientifically proven to make the owner more lucky, $2.3 million still feels like a really big ask, you know? [Smithsonian Magazine]

16 million 3-by-5 cards
The size of the most comprehensive repository of American English, maintained at Merriam-Webster’s headquarters in Springfield, Massachusetts. The records — which are made out of archaic, fibrous data storage system known as “paper” — are said to be fireproof, like a cloud-based backup would also be. [Slate]

As always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 
Like Significant Digits but hate having to click on some website to read it? Great news, then, as it’s also becoming an email newsletter, one you can sign up for here. 
