
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5-2
THEY DID IT! The U.S. women’s national team has won the 2015 FIFA Women’s World Cup, trouncing Japan in one of those games that you can throw in the faces of people who think there’s no scoring in soccer. Going into the tournament final, FiveThirtyEight’s forecasting model had the team’s chances of winning at 67 percent. [FiveThirtyEight]


18 weeks
The U.S. Navy is extending to 18 weeks the amount of paid maternity leave available to female sailors and Marines. The Navy says about 5,000 women will be eligible each year. [Associated Press]


54 percent
Health insurers are trying to crank up rates in states across the country. In Minnesota, Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans are pursuing an average 54 percent hike, but that’s on the high end of the spectrum nationally. The proposed increases range from 20 percent to 40 percent or higher, according the The New York Times. State insurance regulators will have some ability to prevent such large increases from going into effect. [The New York Times]


61 percent

Oxi! In a referendum, Greeks soundly rejected a bailout deal from the country’s creditors that would have led to greater austerity measures. According to preliminary figures from the government, 61 percent voted “no” on the ballot measure. [Business Insider]

More than 30,000

That’s the number of federal inmates who have responded to the Obama administration’s call for clemency applications. Over the next couple of weeks, President Obama may bring the total number of commutations he has granted during his presidency to more than 80 as he acts to reduce the sentences of some nonviolent drug offenders. [The New York Times]

$75,000


A master of disguise pulled off a $75,000 heist from a Wal-Mart in Oklahoma. He dressed up as an armored truck driver, pretended to be at the store to pick up a gigantic pile of money, and then sped off in his Chevrolet Malibu. [News On 6]


1.6 million
Tanning beds — you know, that product that allows you to exchange your future skin health for not looking like a pasty cave-dwelling Excel power user at the beach — are on the decline. In 2013, about 1.6 million fewer women and 400,000 fewer men used tanning beds, compared with 2010. [New York Magazine]

$30.9 million

Four weeks on, and “Jurassic World” is somehow still leading the weekly box office. That “Terminator” sequel failed to bring audiences back, and “Inside Out” has yet to overcome the timeless story of guys who probably should have been more cautious when making dinosaurs. [Bloomberg]

$3.53 billion

That’s the amount of money that drug and medical device companies disclosed that they paid doctors between August 2013 and December 2014. Let those friends from college who were always on the prowl for Xanax know that there is a now a whole database of doctors in their area who took money to promote all those drugs. [ProPublica]

 $2.8 trillion
Markets in China are reeling from a stock market slide, with more than $2.8 trillion in value being wiped out on the Shanghai Composite Index since June 12. The country is taking several steps — like suspending IPOs — to try to stop the drop. [Bloomberg]




If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2-1
The semifinal game between England and Japan ended in heartbreak for Britons, with an own-goal in stoppage time ending the Lionesses’ run. [ESPN FC]


5.3 percent

“Magic Mike XXL” is out in theaters, and you should see it both because Channing Tatum has abs that can probably open jars, and because “Magic Mike” was actually a pretty accurate look into a crucial sector of the American economy. The strip club industry derives 5.3 percent of its revenue from women. [FiveThirtyEight]

44 years
Sonia Manzano has played Maria on Sesame Street for 44 years, but that tenure is coming to an end. She announced that she’s going to retire from the beloved children’s television program after this season. [The AV Club]


 54 years

The U.S. is going to have an embassy in Cuba again, and vice versa, after 54 years of no diplomatic ties. [USA Today]

67 percent


It’s the United States versus Japan in the final of the FIFA Women’s World Cup this Sunday. According to our model, the United States is favored to win the match and the tournament with a 67 percent chance of victory. Still, don’t get too cocky: Japan should still win this game one out of three times. If you want a primer on the team, definitely check out Allison McCann talking to current members of the squad from earlier in the tournament. [FiveThirtyEight]


250 students
Sweet Briar University, a private all-women’s college in Virginia, was saved from closing after a dedicated alumni campaign. Still, the premature closing announcement meant that only 250 students will be returning to campus this fall, down from 561 students last year. [Bloomberg]


600 feet

Comet 67P, where the European Space Agency sent the Rosetta probe and harpooned a lander, is littered with massive sinkholes 600 feet deep. I’m pretty sure this renders the “drillers have to become astronauts to dig 800 feet into an asteroid” plot of “Armageddon” effectively moot. Finally, science standing up to a Michael Bay movie. [The Los Angeles Times]

$45 million
The campaign of Hillary Clinton raised about $45 million since its launch, which is a stack of dough the size of an incumbent president’s. At press time, Iowa local TV news station owners were presumably checking if a shiny new Doppler radar is eligible for Amazon Prime. [ABC News]

$935 million

One side effect of all those comic book movies we keep seeing is that comic book sales are bananas again. Last year they hit mid-1990s sales levels, after adjusting for inflation. About $835 million came from physical sales of comic books and graphic novels and another $100 million from digital sales. [Comichron]

$1.9 billion
Puerto Rico paid the $1.9 billion debt service payment it owed Wednesday, averting a deeper fiscal crisis in the U.S. territory that owes $73 billion total. [CNBC]




Saturday is Independence Day in the U.S. and tomorrow is a company holiday, so we’re off and you’re without a newsletter. Have a good holiday weekend everybody, be cool around the fireworks and don’t do anything too stupid. See you on Monday. 
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1.89 kills per cat per month


It’s crucial to remember that house cats are descended from a line of apex predators and that the urge to hunt never fully left them. New research in the “Ecology and Evolution” journal suggests that outdoor cat owners vastly underestimate the efficient killing machines in their care. In a study of British cats and their owners, the mean number of things a cat kills every month was 1.89. The cats’ owners, meanwhile, had no idea how many things their own cats were killing. Keep them inside, people. The birds don’t stand a chance otherwise. [Ecology and Evolution via Gizmodo]


2-0
THE UNITED STATES WOMEN’S NATIONAL TEAM BEAT GERMANY IN THE SEMIFINALS AND NOW THE TEAM IS GOING TO THE WOMEN’S WORLD CUP FINALS. We told you it was going to be the best game ever. [ESPN]


22 dildos

Earlier this week, the single greatest CNN segment in CNN’s history went on the air. It was a discussion of a purported ISIS flag at an LGBT pride event in London — a discussion that was later invalidated when the flag was revealed to be comprised of dildos rather than legitimate Arabic text. By my count there are 22 distinct dildos represented on the flag, all arranged to appear to look like the banner of the brutal contingent that has assumed control of portions of Syria, Iraq and other areas. Its craftsman is now speaking out about his motivation. [The Guardian]

65th show
Billy Joel will break Elton John’s record for number of shows played at Madison Square Garden Wednesday night. [Newsday]


124 people 
The number of people killed by police this year who were suffering from mental illness or undergoing an emotional crisis. That’s out of 462 total by the Washington Post’s reckoning. One potential cause of this, the Post reports, is that police don’t spend enough time learning how to assist the emotionally disturbed. [The Washington Post]


25,000
The estimated number of annual deaths caused by sugary beverages, according to new research in an American Heart Association journal. Worldwide, the annual death toll is estimated to be 180,000. [The Los Angeles Times]


€802,079
A crowdfunding campaign to raise 1.6 billion euros for Greece — enough to pay the nation’s most recent missed debt payment — has raised €802,079 at press time from 47,570 people who do not quite get how much a billion euros is, or are maybe all in on a joke to show how dumb crowdfunding is. I can’t really tell. [Indiegogo]

$2 million

The estimated salary cap for the 2015-2016 NBA season was $67.1 million for each team, but the actual cap could be $2 million higher. The negotiation period for free agents begins midnight Wednesday, so figuring out how to deal with the still-nebulous cap is likely on general managers’ minds. [CBS Sports]

 52.6 million

The United States has eclipsed Spain to be the nation with the second-highest number of Spanish speakers, behind only Mexico. An estimated  52.6 million Americans speak Spanish. [New York Daily News]

$500 million

I got into this business for a couple of reasons, but none of them were because I wanted to write a daily newsletter that regularly talked about Donald Trump. And yet, here we stand. The presidential candidate and former television personality is suing Univision in a $500 million defamation, breach of contract and free speech lawsuit. [The Hollywood Reporter]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2/3 in each chamber

The Post and Courier in South Carolina called up state legislators and asked how they’d vote on a proposal to remove the Confederate battle flag from the state capitol grounds. In order to get it passed, a two-thirds majority is required in each chamber of the state legislature. Yesterday, by the paper’s count, that threshold was reached. [The Post and Courier via @jaspar]

6 fires

Up to six fires have taken place at black churches in the south in the past week and a half. The FBI is investigating. [NPR]

53 percent

70 percent of academic papers in social science and 53 percent of papers in natural and medical science are published by the top five for-profit journal publishers. This is potentially an issue because the for-profit journals limit access compared to open source counterparts. [CBC]

70 percent
Rare-earth metals — the weird ones on the middle chunk of the periodic table that sound like sensible Targaryen names and make your phone work — exploded as a commodity investment a few years ago due to perceived scarcity. In retrospect, the high prices for the commodities and the rush of companies trying to exploit that scarcity were symptoms of a bubble. China controls 70 percent of the supply of rare-earth elements. [Bloomberg]


$52,000


President Obama’s Labor Department intends to announce a plan to mandate overtime pay for more workers. Mandatory overtime pay could now potentially be owed to people making as much as $52,000, up from its current level of $23,660. Until now those people have not been assured time-and-a-half pay when they work more than 40 hours per week. [NPR]


$79,229.09
Gawker is trying to get emails pertaining to the incident in McKinney, Texas where a police officer brandished a weapon at several unarmed black teenagers and subsequently resigned. They filed a Public Information Act request, and the city said fulfilling the request for records and emails would cost $79,229.09. That’s a lot of money for what is essentially a “Ctrl+F,” “Ctrl+C” and “Ctrl+V” operation. [Gawker]


$2.75 million

That’s the amount of money transferred from Phil Mickelson, the golfer, to a sports gambling handicapper working for an illegal gambling operation. Mickelson has not been charged with anything, but the handicapper has pleaded guilty to money laundering. [ESPN]

$14.5 million
The archdiocese of Los Angeles is trying to sell a former convent to Katy Perry for $14.5 million. The nuns who used to occupy that convent claim that’s not possible because they sold the property two weeks ago to a restaurant owner. I had a whole sentence of Katy Perry song puns ready here, but I’m holstering it. Not worth the roar in my inbox. [Gawker]


26 million
The number of people who have emblazoned a rainbow flag on their Facebook profile to celebrate the Supreme Court’s decision to extend marriage rights to all Americans. [The Washington Post]


$470 million
Uber doesn’t make money, which isn’t particularly shocking — companies like Uber are motivated by growth and not profit at this stage of existence. But wow, does it not make money. According to a report distributed to prospective investors, during an undefined time period the company incurred $470 million in losses while bringing in $415 million in revenue. Uber says the numbers are out of date. [Bloomberg]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
7th resupply
A SpaceX rocket launch failed Sunday when the rocket appeared to disintegrate about two minutes into the flight. It was SpaceX’s seventh delivery of goods to the International Space Station. [CNN]

53 percent
Airbnb is often times less “bed and breakfast” and more “people just live here.” An analysis of Airbnb in New York found that 53 percent of listings are rented upwards of 60 nights per year and three in ten are managed by people with multiple listings. Funny, that sounds a lot like the job description of a landlord. [Gothamist]


61 seconds

Since the earth is ever so slightly slowing its spin, we need to adjust time based on the atomic clock every now and again through “leap seconds.” On June 30, one of those leap seconds is going to take place. You probably won’t notice. But high frequency traders and financial markets might! So lots of work is going into prepping markets for the 61-second long minute. [Bloomberg]

577 shooting victims

Shootings are up in New York in the first half of the year; 577 people have been shot between January 1 and June 14th. That’s 10 percent higher than the same time period last year. [DNA Info]

3,000
Thousands turned out for the funeral for a cat in Japan that was the honorary stationmaster of a rail station in Kishi. Tama was 16. [The Guardian]


$5,000

Two activists were arrested after removing the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the South Carolina state house. They were charged with defacing a monument and could have to pay fines of up to $5,000 or spend three years behind bars. Filmmaker Michael Moore has offered to pay any fines and legal costs for the pair. [Michigan Live]

80,000 volts
New technology behind stun cuffs — which are a pair of handcuffs that can be remotely triggered to give a severe electric shock to the wearer — is raising a lot of questions about how much the prison system should look like a dystopian novel from the ’50s. [The Atlantic]


237,000 rental units
There are 237,000 rental units in San Francisco. About 72 percent of them are rent controlled. That’s nice, because rent in San Francisco is absolutely bananas and liable to rapid rises. But if you’re one of the 28 percent, you are doomed to a wretched existence bound only to the whims of a real estate market content to devour itself. [San Francisco Chronicle]



$1.8 billion

That’s the payment Greece has to make to the IMF on Tuesday. It is not looking good. [BBC]


$73 billion

Forget Greece — Puerto Rico, the U.S. territory, has its own debt crisis. The territory owes $73 billion, has a sluggish economy, and is going to have to negotiate its way out of a potential default as several potentially crippling bond payments are on the horizon. [The Guardian]

CORRECTION (June 29, 8:19 a.m.): An earlier version of this post wrote that Greece owed the IMF $1.6 billion. That’s the amount of euros it owes; the dollar amount is $1.8 billion.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4.8 percent drop

AB InBev, the biggest beer company on the globe, is buying up craft breweries, in part because the company’s main offerings are down. In 2013, Budweiser shipments fell 4.8 percent in North America. [Bloomberg]

6-3

The biggest news yesterday was the 6-3 ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court to uphold the Affordable Care Act. The effect was drastic and immediate from a markets standpoint, with the stocks of the five largest insurers jumping minutes after the decision. By 11 a.m., the decision had added about $3 billion to the combined market capitalization of the companies. [FiveThirtyEight]

8 percentage points
That’s the lead Hillary Clinton has on Sen. Bernie Sanders in New Hampshire, according to a CNN poll released yesterday. Clinton used to be ahead by more. But this isn’t the first time a poll has shown Sanders closing in on Clinton, and she is still heavily favored to win New Hampshire and the nomination. [FiveThirtyEight]


14 percent
According to newly released CDC data from 2011, an estimated 14 percent of HIV positive people did not know they were infected. People who don’t know they have HIV are responsible for about a third of new transmissions of the virus. [The Verge]

18 days

With only 18 days to go until the Miss USA pageant, Univision announced it will not air the event. This is because Donald Trump — you know, the fellow who is No. 2 in Republican primary polls in New Hampshire — is a part-owner of the pageant and also made derisive comments recently about Mexico. When Trump gets a 3 a.m. phone call saying his pageant won’t be on TV, will he be ready to lead? [TIME]


43.4 percent
Retractions appear to be on the rise in scientific journals, but that may not mean people are getting worse at their jobs. From the early 2000s through 2012, the percentage of articles retracted from PubMed due to suspected fraud tripled to 43.4 percent. But, there’s evidence this is because the community is getting better at identifying fraud rather than getting more fraudulent. [Priceonomics and PNAS]


54 percent

The pay of CEOs at America’s companies is up 54 percent since the economic recovery began in 2009; the average employee’s earnings are totally flat. [The Guardian]

8,678 cases
Wish-Bone Ranch Salad Dressing — the liquid that fuels this great nation — has had a catastrophic mix up, and 8,678 cases of what is probably most Americans’ main source of Vitamin E are being recalled. Those cases were mislabeled and are actually bleu cheese dressing, not Ranch. When will our national nightmare end? [Fox Connecticut]


$72,400 in damages
A jury in New Jersey yesterday found an institution selling itself as an “ex-gay” therapy center guilty of defrauding customers. The defendants will have to pay $72,400 in damages. [Mic]


$150 million

LEGO is trying to find a more environmentally friendly material to replace the plastic currently used to make its bricks. Will the new material also be more friendly to the thousands of feet destroyed annually by stepping on a loose LEGO? [The Huffington Post]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey. Have a good weekend!








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
25 percentage points

Gov. Bobby Jindal’s approval rating among Louisiana Republicans has dropped 25 percentage points since 2012, and Jindal, who announced he’s running for president Wednesday, is joining a crowded field and polling below Donald Trump. Let me put it this way: Jindal is a rounding error away from polling at the same level I am for the GOP nomination. [FiveThirtyEight]

40 years
Gang-smuggled meat. That’s what Chinese custom officials are dealing with. Those officials have seized more than 100,000 tons of frozen meat, and some of it is more than 40 years old, reportedly. I am not a butcher, but I assure you that is not how to age meat properly. [NPR]


77 percent
The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs launched a “sting operation” involving 120 grocery stores all over town to find out how many were overcharging consumers for pre-packaged food priced by the pound. Of the 80 types of food tested at Whole Foods, every one had an inaccurate label according to the agency, and 77 percent of grocery stores overall were hit with at least one violation. [New York Daily News]


92 percent favorable
Did you know that the Philippines thinks the United States is great? I did not! The U.S. has a 92 percent favorable in the Philippines, the highest in a new Pew survey of 39 countries. The Philippines even makes Canada look like that friend that never texts us back. Oh, also, Russia hates our guts. [Pew Research Center]


100 times
Fun fact: Human activity releases roughly 100 times as much carbon dioxide as global volcanic activity does. Wait, that’s not a fun fact. That’s not fun at all, really. Either way, global warming isn’t because of volcanos. [Bloomberg]


250 lobbyists

That’s how many lobbyists Uber has registered in statehouses across the U.S., not even counting municipal lobbyists. Given how tightly regulated the transportation industry tends to be in metropolitan areas, the tech company has found a fairly old-school way of cutting through red tape. [Bloomberg]

$2.9 million
That’s New York City’s laughably tiny budget for rodent control. The day New York manages to control this city’s rats with that amount of money, I promise to take the ARC tunnel train into the city, skip on over to the Second Avenue Subway, take it to the West Side Stadium they built for the 2012 New York Summer Olympics and then eat my “Re-elect Trump 2020” hat in front of the entire New York Jets Super Bowl victory parade. [The New York Times]

$500,000

Doctors made fun of a patient while he was under anesthesia, and the patient sued for malpractice and was awarded $500,000. The patient originally wanted $1.75 million, but he received a middling $500,000 because two jurors — one thinking he should get nothing, one thinking he should get a lot more money — compromised and figured a half-mil should do the trick. [TIME]

410 million years

That’s about the age of a fossil that appears to show the earliest evolutionary incarnation of tooth-esque protrusions. Basically, researchers in the Netherlands found one of the first things on earth to learn how to masticate. [Phys.org]


$500 million

The Australian Navy seized about two-thirds of a ton — $500 million worth — of heroin from a sailing vessel in the Indian ocean. [BBC]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4 days

Skinny jeans sent an Australian woman to the hospital for four days after cutting off blood supply to her lower legs. Book deal ahoy. [NBC News]

7-for-1 


Netflix announced plans for a 7-for-1 stock split effective July 14, a move designed to make the stock — trading at a whopping $702.80 in after-hours trading — more accessible to investors. The stock value skyrocketed this year, and I take full credit because I canceled so many plans to watch “Daredevil.” [Bloomberg]

11 percent
A Suffolk University poll of New Hampshire Republicans found that Donald Trump would take 11 percent of the vote in a primary, putting him at second place overall. A Suffolk University poll of New Hampshire Republicans found that Donald Trump would take 11 percent of the vote in a primary, putting him at second place overall. A Suffolk University poll of New Hampshire Republicans found that Donald Trump would take 11 percent of the vote in a primary, putting him at second place overall. [The Washington Post]


19 percentage points
Among white Americans, 67 percent agree that when Americans protest treatment from the government it makes the country better. However, when white Americans were asked about black Americans protesting treatment from the government, only 48 percent said it made the country better, a difference of 19 percentage points. [Public Religion Research Institute, via @bwitkovsky]


$55

A new study out of the Harvard School of Public Health found that a national tax on sweetened beverages would cost $51 million in its first year, but over time would result in an estimated $55 saved for every dollar spent because of obesity-related health costs. [Harvard School of Public Health]

More than 29,000

The number of items bearing the Confederate flag that were available on Amazon, before the retailer began removing them from its website Tuesday. It joins Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer, and Sears, which just yesterday I learned still existed, in banning the items. [CNN]



220,000 shares
Columbia University will be the first U.S. college to stop investing its endowment in private prison corporations, announcing plans to sell 220,000 shares in private-security firm G4S, as well as its shares in the Corrections Corporation of America. [CNN]

$500,000
Los Angeles paid Wells Fargo more than $500,000 to print checks the city was actually printing on its own. The city controller wants the money returned. [Los Angeles Times]


$9.1 million

From NASA to DARPA, the United States government prides itself on being on the bleeding edge of technology. At every possible opportunity, our military and government pursues — if not leads — the very state of the art, putting tax dollars to work. In related news, the Navy’s Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command agreed to pay Microsoft $9.1 million to maintain Windows XP for them because they can’t upgrade to a vaguely modern operating system, and Microsoft stopped maintaining the OS for free a year ago. [Business Insider]


$3 trillion 

Mergers and acquisitions are back, people. This year global merger and acquisition volume is projected to be above $3 trillion, and long story short that means we’re back to pre-recession levels. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
Two-thirds majority
According to the South Carolina Heritage Act of 2000, that’s the state Legislature supermajority required to remove the Confederate flag from the state Capitol’s grounds. A Public Policy Polling survey released Monday found that 64 percent of registered voters felt U.S. government buildings should not fly the Confederate flag. Another 15 percent had a neutral or unsure reaction, and 21 percent were in favor. [FiveThirtyEight]


3 misdemeanors each



Three American heroes who sky-dived from the roof of the nearly completed 1 World Trade Center tower in 2013 were each convicted of three misdemeanors for their awesome story. The jurors, presumably realizing they were in the presence of three stone-cold badasses, declined to convict them of the felony charge of burglary, because really the only thing the trio broke into was our hearts. Also, technically, 1 World Trade Center. They were convicted of two counts of reckless endangerment and also violating an ordinance against parachuting off buildings. That last one is particularly disappointing, because I did not realize such a law already existed in New York, and how rad would it be if the city had to make a new law specifically after these heroes, you know? [The New York Times]

21

Hawaii is now the first state to raise the minimum smoking age to 21, effective Jan. 1. The rule also applies to electronic cigarettes. [Reuters]

75 percent
A new NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll found that 75 percent of expected Democratic primary voters had Hillary Clinton as their first choice for the nomination, with closest runner-up Sen. Bernie Sanders earning 15 percent. [NBC News/Wall Street Journal (PDF)]


88 percent

The U.S. women’s national team beat Colombia 2-0 in the first knockout round of the women’s World Cup on Monday. The U.S. squad will face China on Friday, and according to FiveThirtyEight’s model has an 88 percent chance of winning that game. Overall, the U.S. team now has a 32 percent chance of winning the tournament, slightly behind Germany, which has a 34 percent chance. [FiveThirtyEight]


$1,600

That’s the veterinary bill for a dog who ate what was most likely an edible product infused with THC, the compound in marijuana that gets you high. As always, readers, please refrain from throwing your psychoactive drugs on the ground on trails. Pretty sure they taught us that in D.A.R.E. [ABC 7 News Denver]

2,000 leads
The New York State Police are still looking for two escaped prisoners in upstate New York and have found a promising lead in DNA at a cabin in Owls Head, which is a real name of a real town, apparently. A spokesman said police have checked in on 2,000 leads, which is more than 100 leads per day since the June 6 escape. [Reuters]


67.6 million

Obese American adults now outnumber adults who are merely overweight: 67.6 million Americans over age 25 are obese, and 65.2 million more are overweight. [Los Angeles Times]

$1.6 billion

That’s how much airlines took in during the first quarter of 2015 in bag fees and reservation change fees. The fees are annoying, but they’re also one of the main reasons airlines are profitable these days. [Associated Press]



$2.7 billion
The U.S. energy industry did not have a good first quarter, given the collapse in the price of oil. Texas mining, oil and gas workers were among the hardest hit, losing $2.7 billion in wages in the three-month period. [Quartz]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. 
13 percent


That’s the percentage of the “facial aesthetic market” — Botox and whatnot — represented by men. Several companies are gunning for the “Brotox” market, trying to dial that share up a little higher. [Bloomberg]



15 percent

Municipal recycling is in a bit of a crisis at the moment, with a number of factors coming together that make it harder for companies to make a profit. Falling oil prices means that commodities prices are going down in general, and the decline in newspaper sales has also made a dent in profits. The one thing going right for recyclers is cardboard shipping boxes, which in the age of Amazon can account for 15 percent of a city’s recycling. [The Washington Post]

38 percent drop
Deaths from coronary heart disease are down 38 percent from 2003 to 2013, a result of declines in smoking, better cholesterol and blood pressure management, and superior treatments. Emergency room treatment for heart attacks has benefited from the use of data. [The New York Times]



More than 50 giant stones
Stonehenge may actually be way bigger than originally believed. Archaeologists using radar have located all sorts of huts and burial mounds, but have also found another monument consisting of upwards of 50 giant stones arranged around Stonehenge. [io9]


90 percent
A new cancer treatment that involves the removal, genetic engineering and subsequent reinsertion of T cells in the bloodstream has been making waves: According to the early results, 90 percent of patients treated with the method whose acute lymphoblastic leukemia had returned and had resisted other drugs went into remission. The usual rate is less than 10 percent. [MIT Technology Review]

100 mph

Jake Lloyd, who won the audition to play Anakin Skywalker in “The Phantom Menace” but lost all semblance of a life and career after that, was arrested on suspicion of reckless driving. Police say he was speeding more than a hundred miles per hour during a chase in South Carolina. [WPTV]

5,424 signatures



Etsy banned the sale of spells and metaphysical goods, meaning that sellers can no longer peddle magic stuff on the Internet retailer. Keep it in Diagon Alley, people. At the time of publication, 5,424 people — presumably mostly wizards and affiliated magical retailers — had signed a petition asking Etsy to reverse its decision to ban magic. [The Petition Site, via The Verge]

 £12,000
Someone stole  £12,000 worth of cookies from a factory in Wales. Monsters. [BBC]


60,000 documents

WikiLeaks is dumping a big pile of documents that reportedly pertain to the internal dealings of Saudi Arabia. [The Independent]

$102 million


“Jurassic World” is the second film to make more than $100 million in two separate weekends, pulling in $102 million this past weekend. [Variety]




If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.






