
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0
Saturday September 12 was technically the peak of the Atlantic hurricane season. That may come as a surprise to those paying attention since there were zero hurricanes in the northern hemisphere this weekend. That’s the first time that we’ve had a storm-less peak in 38 years. [Science News]

3 percent
Donald Trump uses an iPhone. But @realDonaldTrump doesn’t always tweet from one. An in-depth investigation of the GOP frontrunner’s tweets from April 23 through Sept. 14 has found that — given his iPhone usage — at most only 3 percent of his 3,197 tweets were offered by Trump’s own gilded thumbs. [Mother Jones]

33 percent
Ta-Nehisi Coates is out with a fantastic essay on mass incarceration and the impact it has had on the black American family. It’s packed with fascinating stats, but most striking to me was the data on parole: In 1984, 70 percent of parolees were not arrested during their parole period and obtained full freedom. By 1996, that number crashed to 44 percent, and in 2013 it was 33 percent. [The Atlantic]

400 kilograms
Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic will increase the power of the rockets it uses to deliver things to space, allowing the company to transport up to 400 kg of payload to low earth orbit. People won’t be going into orbit — yet — but communications satellites will, and those come with lucrative contracts. [The Washington Post]

$433.24
The National Building Museum in Washington, D.C. — which is far cooler than it sounds, believe me — recently wrapped up an art installation comprised of a giant ball pit in the middle of the museum. Following the cleanup, the National Building Museum had recovered $433.24 worth of American legal tender lost in the ball pit. [The Washington Post]

1310
The year of a court document containing what may be the first use of the word “fuck” in a sexual context in the English language, according to a researcher at Keele University. It is a person named “Roger Fuckebythenavele,” a truly lamentable name in any period. [Quartz]

$3 million
How much money the National Pork Board pays every year to license the slogan, “The other white meat,” from the National Pork Producers Council. That seems like a lot for a slogan, but it seems like far too much when accounting for the fact that the National Pork Board stopped using that slogan in 2011. The current slogan for America’s pork farmers is “Pork: Be Inspired.” [POLITICO]

$99,999,999
After installing new check processing equipment, the IRS is now unable to process any check that exceeds $99,999,999. Assuming you are profoundly in debt to the IRS, the agency now requests you either wire the money or send multiple checks. [The Associated Press]

$113 million
The former U.S. Consulate in Mumbai was sold to India’s eighth richest man for $113 million, the largest ever residential real estate purchase in the nation. The U.S. had a 999 year lease on the property since 1957 and has been itching to get out of it since 2011. You read that right. I’ve love to hear more about how we got into a thousand year lease on the Indian seaside. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1.8 percent shrink
Advertising spending on print magazines is forecasted to drop 1.8 percent this year to $17.4 billion. That’ll be a fun challenge for new Conde Nast CEO Bob Sauerberg, who was promoted over the weekend. [Wall Street Journal]

5th weekend
This weekend was the fifth in a row in which the top movie in America had a predominantly black cast. The movies: “Straight Outta Compton,” “War Room,” and “The Perfect Guy.” [The New York Times]

6-4, 5-7, 6-4, 6-4
Novak Djokovic defeated Roger Federer in the U.S. Open final Sunday night, his third Grand Slam singles title this year. As my colleagues Benjamin Morris and Carl Bialik will tell you, the rivalry between these two is among the best ever. [ESPN]

23 days off
Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush is running for president and his son, Texas Land Commissioner George P. Bush, is helping him. Seems reasonable. But George hasn’t been at his job much as a result: In the first 50 days after his father announced he was running for election, Bush the Younger has been outside of Texas or off work for a cumulative 23 of them, a Houston Chronicle investigation found. [The Houston Chronicle]

59.5 percent
Jeremy Corbyn, a left-wing member of the U.K. Labour party, won 59.5 percent of the vote to become the new party leader. Corbyn focused on inequality and poverty in the leadership election. [BBC]

75 square miles
A fire ravaging Lake County in California is, as of last night, not at all contained and has claimed 75 square miles worth of territory. Upwards of 1,300 people evacuated Middletown. [Los Angeles Times]

93.7 percent
The NFL’s new rule attempting to make extra point attempts harder — by moving the kick back to 32 yards — seems to have succeeded in making the point after a touchdown less of a certainty. Last year, teams scored the extra point 99.3 percent of the time, which is super boring. Yesterday afternoon, there were 63 attempts and 4 misses, which gives us a 93.7 percent success rate. Sure, it’s a single day and small sample size, but it’s a good sign for the league. [Deadspin]

140,000 saigas
Saiga are super-endangered herbivores that look like a camel got funky with a deer. Last May, about 140,000 of them dropped dead over the course of several days. While the exact cause of the die-off remains a mystery, researchers were able to determine that a bacteria that lives in their intestinal tract is involved in some way with the collapse of their immune system. As someone who personally has lots of bacteria in his intestinal tract and also has an immune system, this is horrifying. [The Observer]

2.8 million
Heavy flooding in the eastern region of Japan has led the Fire and Disaster Management Agency to advise 2.8 million people to evacuate. It’s the end of the rainy season and the rain has been nonstop in parts of the country. [CNN]

$25.6 million
“The Visit,” the latest film from M. Night Shyamalan — whose directorial career has been in a bit of a death spiral — took $25.6 million this past weekend at the box office, which for a $5 million movie is pretty good, all things considered. The movie fell to second place behind “The Perfect Guy,” but it’s nice to see Shyamalan pull off the first step of a comeback. [Box Office Mojo]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
11 percent
Despite antibiotic treatments, that’s the fatality rate of people infected with Yersinia pestis, the bacteria that causes plague. Yes, plague, that thing that apparently still exists. Also, military labs may have mislabeled, improperly stored or shipped infectious plague samples, which has led to a moratorium on research since Sept. 2. Have a nice weekend! [USA Today]

15 percent
Probability of winning the Super Bowl for Seattle and New England, according to the newly unleashed FiveThirtyEight Elo NFL predictions model. New England’s win over Pittsburgh last night bumped the Patriots’ chances up from 14 percent to 15 percent. If your team is in the low probabilities in the model, be sure to tweet “So you’re saying there’s a chance” to my colleagues on the viz team. I know from last year that they love that. [FiveThirtyEight]

56 people
The number of people since Sept. 4 who have been hospitalized because of Salmonella infections, the most recent victims in an outbreak linked to cucumbers that is believed to have affected hundreds. That’s right, we have more horrifying bacteria news today in Significant Digits. Tell your friends, it’s a great newsletter. The NIH recommends cleaning utensils and surfaces, cooking food and refrigerating perishables to prevent the disease. I recommend consuming cucumbers only in the form of picklebacks and tzatziki sauce. Not for health reasons or anything, just because they kind of suck otherwise. [TIME]

63 percent
Percentage of Americans, according to a Pew Research Center study on scientific literacy, who can correctly interpret a scatterplot graph. This has led me to drastically re-evaluate my job security. [Pew Research Center]

90 days
Airbus is working on a drone that can fly for 90 consecutive days without refueling, hoping to sell it to the U.K. Ministry of Defense. The reconnaissance aircraft would, I presume, form some kind of autonomous Skynet with no negative consequences whatsoever. [The Telegraph]

$2,975
Lots of companies are adopting models to closely track employee performance. Do people love being ruthlessly tracked by corporate overlords who monitor their every move to extract every modicum of shareholder value from them? Nah. But the thing is, it works: In some restaurant chains that adopted a close employee monitoring system, weekly revenue rose by $2,975. [FiveThirtyEight]

36,000
Reported circulation of The Riverdale Record, a fake newspaper produced on behalf of New York state Sen. Jeff Klein. Journalists said Klein was displeased with recent coverage in The Riverdale Press, an actual newspaper, which reported on Klein’s donations from a real estate mogul who funded colleagues now under investigation for corruption. [Gotham Gazette]

$50,000
Daniel Craig, who plays James Bond, gave nearly $50,000 to an organization he believed was supporting the presidential campaign of Sen. Bernie Sanders. Unfortunately for Craig, the Super PAC has failed to file campaign finance disclosures, is disavowed by Sanders himself and is run by a man wanted on two warrants in the state of Arizona. Well, [sips martini] M always said Bond was reckless with Moneypenny [speeds off in Aston Martin, sends spec script to MGM]. [The Center for Public Integrity]

$1.9 million
A side effect of your state defending its same-sex marriage ban is that it may now be on the hook for the legal fees of the people who were suing it. Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, Virginia, Oregon, Colorado, Utah and North Dakota have already settled with victorious litigants, and Michigan is considering how to respond to a $1.9 million demand from plaintiffs’ lawyers. [Al Jazeera]

$79 million
Total grants to a project to process 70,000 untested rape kits in 27 states, thanks to a $38 million contribution from the New York County district attorney’s office and $41 million announced by Vice President Joe Biden and Attorney General Loretta Lynch. [The Huffington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
7 same-sex marriage licenses
With Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis busted out of the clink in Kentucky, part of the terms of her release was that she would not interfere with the issuing of marriage licenses anymore. In her absence, 10 licenses were issued, seven of them to same-sex couples, the latter being her particular gripe. Deputy Clerk Brian Mason said he would continue issuing the marriage licenses, regardless of what Davis had to say about it. And thus, social progress was made. [The Lexington Herald-Leader]

At least 10 CIA officers
In the course of research for “Zero Dark Thirty,” the film about the killing of Osama bin Laden, at least 10 CIA National Clandestine Service officers met with director Kathryn Bigelow and writer Mark Boal to punch up the script, new documents obtained by Vice reveal. Ironically, the film lost the 2012 Academy Award for Best Picture to “Argo,” a movie about CIA officers punching up a movie script in service to a clandestine operation. [Vice]

$20 per ounce
A sales-tax holiday in Colorado means that the state will be forced to suspend taxes on recreational marijuana for one day Sept. 16, which will make that libertarian stoner you knew in college who moved out to Telluride super thrilled. This amounts to about $20 off the price of a medium-quality ounce of marijuana in Denver. This is the worst thing to happen to the War on Drugs since decades of failure. [SFGate]

21 percent
According to the Pew Research Center, the percentage of Americans who support the Iran nuclear deal dropped from 33 percent in July to 21 percent in September. [Pew Research Center]

29 percent
According to a new poll, the percentage of Americans who could imagine a scenario in which they would support a U.S. military coup of the federal government, which is all kinds of messed up. Seriously, guys? Broken down by party identification, this included 43 percent of Republicans and 20 percent of Democrats, which is still far too high if you ask me. Those of you in favor, watch the documentary series “Battlestar Galactica” and tell me if you stand by your position. [YouGov]

75 percent
Percentage of Bloomberg LP’s revenue derived from the Bloomberg terminal, a financial research and industry communication tool that costs a lot of money but is pretty much necessary in vast numbers for the operation of a modern financial institution. Startups have been seeking to disrupt the business. Growth in the terminal industry has slowed — but not stopped — since the recession. [The New York Times]

$99
Cost of the Apple Pencil, a jumped-up stylus for the iPad that the company is now hawking to see how far it can push capitalism toward its logical conclusion. Apple also announced a TV product that has many things other TV products have and — golly! — a new iPhone. Killing the game, Apple. [Reuters]

7,795 milligrams
Sodium content in a Jersey Mike’s Buffalo Chicken Cheese Steak (with white giant bread), one of the highest-sodium dishes you can get in New York City. For reference, the FDA-recommended daily limit is 2,300 mg. The city’s Board of Health approved a rule requiring chain stores to flag products with high sodium by Dec. 1, presumably ruining future visits to Taco Bell that once brought beefy five-layer contentment after a hard day. [Bloomberg]

6.6 million viewers
“The Late Show with Stephen Colbert” is off to a solid start, with 6.6 million people tuning in to the first show, which featured former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush and actor George Clooney. [The AV Club]

$725 million
Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox is buying 73 percent of the remaining National Geographic Web and print business from the nonprofit National Geographic Society. [BuzzFeed]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3rd revision
A new policy out of the Vatican will make it easier for Catholics to obtain marriage annulments by reducing costs and complications in the process. According to the monsignor overseeing the changes, this is only the third time in Catholic Church history that the process has been reformed. [The Guardian]

18 percent
Percentage of people with student debt exceeding $100,000 who default on that debt, which is the lowest default rate of any debt bracket: Students who owe $1,000 to $5,000 in debt, for example, default on those loans 34 percent of the time. One cause of this disparity is that people with more college debt are likelier to have higher-paying jobs. [Fusion]

20 percent
Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush wrote about his tax plan in The Wall Street Journal, highlighting intentions to reduce the corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 20 percent if he’s elected president. He also would assess a one-time 8.75 percent tax on the $2 trillion in corporate assets held overseas by U.S. companies. Boilerplate language about simplifying the tax code is also a prominent element of the plan. [The Wall Street Journal]

64 people
Sixty-four men and women have been charged with Islamic State-related activities in the U.S.; the average age of those charged is 25. Since January 2014, 12 have been convicted. [The Washington Post]

$20,580
Nicolò Falcone, an Italian, has won the 2015 Monopoly World Championship. He takes home $20,580 as the grand prize, which is the total amount of money in the Monopoly bank before your brother starts stealing $500 from it every turn when he thinks you’re not looking. [Business Wire]

500,000 asylum seekers
Germany is stepping up to accept refugees seeking asylum in the European Union, most of whom are escaping the civil war in Syria. Although Germany expects 800,000 migrants this year alone, the vice chancellor said the nation could accommodate a half-million people annually for several years. [BBC]

$6.4 million
The city of Baltimore has reached a settlement with the estate of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old man who died in April after his spine was injured while he was in police custody. The settlement amount is larger than the combined total of 120 other legal actions brought against the Baltimore Police Department since 2011. [The Baltimore Sun]

$28.5 million
Kaley Cuoco-Sweeting (“The Big Bang Theory”) and Sofia Vergara (“Modern Family”) tied as the highest-paid television actresses of the year. Fifteen TV actresses made more than $5 million in the period analyzed. [Forbes]

22.8 billion pounds
The British monarchy is wealthier than ever, with the combined worth of the family’s assets estimated at 22.8 billion pounds, or $34.8 billion. The genetic lottery winners are among the top 20 wealthiest people worldwide. [Reuters]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
41 percent
An NBC News/Marist poll of Democratic voters in New Hampshire found that 41 percent would support Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders were the election held that day, 9 points more than Hillary Clinton. This poll included Vice President Joe Biden in the mix, who with 16 percent support played a bit of a spoiler in the matchup. But, uh, Feel The Bern? [Reuters]

42 percent
The share of the domestic tablet market that is controlled by Samsung and Apple, with Amazon’s tablets accounting for less than 1 percent. Amazon would like to change that and will begin selling a 6-inch tablet for $50. [The Wall Street Journal]

Nearly 100 stones
A “superhenge” that makes Stonehenge look like a bunch of Lincoln Logs someone left on a playground has been found nearly 2 miles south of the famous site, 3 feet underground. The arrangement — which, come on, we’re talking some big rocks here, not anything really that mind-blowing — is an estimated 4,500 years old. I’m sure you could go and check out the 3-D visualizations cooked up to portray it, but seriously, we are just talking about some rocks. [BBC]

99 counties
It’s trendy for presidential aspirants to attempt “The Full Grassley,” a tour of all 99 Iowa counties named after Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley. In past election cycles, Rick Santorum and John Edwards enjoyed success at the Iowa caucuses after completing the Grassley, but Michele Bachmann didn’t. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker announced that he intends to complete the task. [The New York Times]

946 Mediterranean cypress trees
After a devastating fire swept through a 50,000-acre experimental tree site in 2012, a pair of scientist brothers found that the Mediterranean cypress is functionally fireproof, given that almost 1,000 of them survived. Now they’re trying to see if the trees can be planted as a fire barrier in forests. [Washington Post]

20,000 refugees
British Prime Minister David Cameron announced that the U.K. would accept up to 20,000 Syrian refugees in the next five years, a number that political opponents say is too low. The refugees will be allowed to apply for asylum after five years. [The Guardian]

$3.03 million
How much Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio and groups affiliated with his campaign have raised from donors connected to the tech industry, leading the pack of presidential hopefuls by a substantial margin. That’s mostly from $3 million in contributions to his super PAC from Oracle founder Larry Ellison. [Recode]

$4.48 billion
Total domestic box office haul from May 1 to Labor Day, which still trails 2013 (before factoring in inflation). Box office returns were up 10.4 percent over last summer. [Variety]

$5 billion
Potential sales of Star Wars merch in 2016, according to a market research report. Friday was “Force Friday,” a made-up holiday where a bunch of Star Wars stuff went on sale. From a numbers perspective, Star Wars is a very successful toy franchise that happens to make movies every now and again. As always, full disclosure is that Disney owns both FiveThirtyEight and Star Wars, but I don’t see a complimentary BB-8 rolling around my apartment right now, so I’m not exactly feeling the synergy if you catch my drift. [The Week]

$6.6 billion
Estimated amount Germany will spend in 2015 to deal with the approximately 800,000 migrants who are expected to enter the nation by the end of the year. Last week Germany and Austria opened their borders to refugees from Syria and other countries. [NBC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0 games suspended
NFL Commissioner and [expletives redacted] Roger Goodell’s decision to suspend New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady has been overruled. Goodell, ever the senator’s son, pledged to fight this as far as it will go, but the long and short of it for now is that Brady will play in Week 1. This is, according to a FiveThirtyEight analysis, a rather big deal for the Patriots. [CNBC]

2 bears
A Chinese man was sold a bill of goods, to put it mildly, as apparently the two puppies he adopted two years ago were in fact black bears. The man realized the animals weren’t dogs after visiting a local wildlife sanctuary and seeing several bears. [The Dodo]

8 percent
Percentage of those ages 18 to 34 who identified themselves as members of the Greatest Generation in a Pew survey, to which I say damn right. Are people in that age range typically described as “millennials”? Sure. But let’s get a couple of things straight. First, naming generations is a pseudoscience developed by charlatans with peculiar and frankly stupid notions of generational predestination. Second, any society that has convinced itself that its greatest generation has past — and do not get me wrong, they were awesome — dooms itself to decline. Third, naming a new generation before its finest hour is an act of desperation that the dying prosecute on the ascending. Are 18- to 34-year-olds millennials? Maybe. Are they the greatest generation? Give us a few years to find out. Kudos to the 8 percent who think they already know. [Pew Research Center]

10 percent
Google Chrome is a busy web browser from a processing standpoint, with each individual tab constituting its own process. This means that the browser runs a lot slower when a lot of tabs are open. Google is rolling out an update that reduces each page’s memory use by 10 percent, something that could have a huge effect for people like me who still have tabs open from literally weeks ago. [The Verge]

33 percent
Polling for the New Democratic Party of Canada, according to the CBC. Canadians vote on Oct. 19, and right now Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s Conservative Party is lagging behind the NDP with 29 percent support. [Bloomberg]

52 years
Yesterday, my colleague Jody Avirgan — host of our fantastic What’s The Point podcast — spent the day on the New York City subway system, traveling 154 miles in almost 14 hours all over the city in pursuit of the longest continuous non-redundant subway trip. I bring this up because Jody is a madman, as apparently the New York City subway system is so decrepit and in need of infrastructure overhauls that one analysis estimates the work will take 52 years to complete. [New York Daily News]

84-hour work week
A metals company in Pittsburgh hired a staffing firm to put out the worst Craigslist ad ever, seeking replacement labor to work 84-hour weeks paying $1,700 to $3,000. Allegheny Technologies is currently in a contract dispute with employees stretching into its third week and desperately needs workers to cross the picket line to work 12-hour shifts. [Quartz]

$125,000
A Peoria, Illinois, resident whose home was raided by police after running a Twitter account parodying the city’s mayor has settled a civil rights lawsuit for $125,000. I worry I’m reading this as “You can make money by annoying the right elected officials on the Internet” more than I probably should. [Ars Technica]

$14 million
Approximate amount spent on TV advertising by Republican campaigns and allies thus far in the election cycle. Is that a lot of money? Sure. But an estimated $4.4 billion will be spent on this election, so take this as a standard reminder that the race has barely begun. [FiveThirtyEight]

$500 million
Reported cash offer to Elemental Technologies, a mobile video company, from Amazon in an acquisition bid. Should that number bear out, it’ll be the fifth-largest Amazon acquisition ever. [Forbes]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 correspondents
While all eyes have been on the debut of Stephen Colbert at the “Late Show,” the “Daily Show” with Trevor Noah added three new correspondents. Ronny Chieng, Desi Lydic and Roy Wood Jr. are joining “The Best F#@king News Team Ever.” [Gothamist]

5 bears
Five polar bears have captured a team of scientists in Russia. The bears are, according to CNN, “hungry” and blocking two meteorologists and an engineer from leaving a weather station. It has come to a point where the team is begging the Russian government for equipment to scare the bears away. Get a camera there. Get a camera there right now, CNN. I will watch a team of unhappy researchers try to evade bears for far longer than your coverage of that plane. [CNN]

15.6 percent
According to a survey of Harvard freshmen, the percentage of the incoming class who are the first in their families to go to college. That said, a whopping 16.8 percent of the Harvard freshman class had one or more parents who went to Harvard, and 27.8 percent overall reported some relative had attended the school. [The Crimson]

71 percent
At 71 percent, Japan has the highest median favorability rating of nine Asia-Pacific nations in a public opinion survey of the region. China enjoys a 57 percent favorability rating. North Korea was not surveyed, though, so take this with a grain of salt, I suppose. [Pew Research Center]

194
The number of laboratories to which the military accidentally sent live samples of the anthrax virus — substantially higher than originally stated. Are you worried that some of that live bioweapon was accidentally sent to a lab in your state? Well, fret no longer, because now we know that yes, live anthrax was indeed sent to every single state. Also Guam, the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Whoops. [Military.com]

250 million kilometers
The Tajik state news agency announced this week that a nearby planet — 250 million kilometers away from Earth and located between Mars and Jupiter — had been named after Tajikistan. But no such thing was done by any international body, and the alleged planet most likely doesn’t exist. The “International Astrophysicists Union” that reportedly named the planet certainly does not exist. I worry that we’ve stumbled on a bit of a Russell’s teapot situation here. [Calvert Journal]

4,200 people
Italy and Greece are struggling to deal with an influx of migrants, with two new ships carrying more than 4,200 people arriving in Greece yesterday. The Dublin Regulation holds that refugees seeking asylum in the European Union must apply in the first country they set foot in. Since Italy and Greece are, geographically speaking, pretty obviously on the Mediterranean, they’ve seen some of the largest influxes of people seeking asylum from the Syrian civil war. [BBC]

66 percent
Percentage of the construction toys market controlled by Lego last year. The company reported favorable earnings yesterday and is still apparently seeing growth as a result of last year’s “The Lego Movie.” [Bloomberg]

$5 million
Damages sought in a lawsuit by Harris Faulkner, a Fox News host, from Hasbro, which makes the Littlest Pet Shop line of toys. The line includes a plastic hamster named Harris Faulkner that the television personality claims resembles her likeness. In some personal news, I probably need to disclose my forthcoming suit against the My Little Pony line of toys over its “Colt Hickey” toy, which as “the pony that drinks too much and doesn’t shave as often as he should” has unfairly appropriated my likeness and personal brand. [The Guardian]

10 million tapes
As a millennial, it’s my obligation to say, “Golly, what’s a cassette tape, haha?” here, but I’m going to skip that and just get to the meat: There is not only a company that still manufactures audio cassette tapes, but it’s also making a mint doing so. National Audio Company sold 10 million tapes last year and sales are up 20 percent this year. Music cassettes account for about 70 percent of their sales. There is life after disruption by tech startups, it seems. [Bloomberg]

CORRECTION (Sept. 3, 10:58 a.m.): An earlier version of an item in this article misstated the distance of an alleged planet allegedly named after the country Tajikistan. It is allegedly 250 miles away from Earth, not 250 kilometers. It still definitely doesn’t exist.
CORRECTION (Sept. 3, 2:25 p.m.): This is what happens when we write about fake planets. A previous correction to an item in this article again misstated the distance of an alleged planet allegedly named after the country Tajikistan. It is — fictionally — 250 million kilometers from Earth, not 250 miles.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

4 designs

New Zealand is entertaining the idea of changing up its flag. The government received 10,000 design submissions, but only four remain in the running. Three of them feature a silver fern, which today I learned is a treasured symbol of New Zealand iconography. The flags will go before a popular referendum in November using the delightful ranked-preference voting methodology. The winner of that contest will go head to head with the current flag in a second referendum in March. This is probably the single greatest event in vexillology in years. [New Zealand Herald]


11.3 percent

While women own 36.2 percent of businesses, women-owned firms make only 11.3 percent of the revenue, according to a Pew Research Center analysis of Census data. A similar disparity exists for minority-owned businesses. [Pew Research Center]


16.6 percent
Percentage of the U.S. advertising market that will be spent on mobile digital ads in 2015, up 59 percent over last year. Spending on mobile ads is expected to surpass desktop and print advertising this year. [Wall Street Journal]

23rd
Facebook’s new anti-spam algorithm was built in the programming language Haskell. This probably means nothing to you, but Haskell is the 23rd most commonly used language on GitHub, which is to say it’s pretty uncommon.  Calling Haskell “esoteric” isn’t exactly right, but it’s a pretty deep cut on the programming language front. The main reason for the selection is that Haskell is good at running multiple functions simultaneously, useful for Facebook in fighting lots and lots of spam across billions of messages. [Wired]


$30

Comcast, ever innovating, is trying out a new $30 fee that will allow Florida customers to surpass an arbitrary 300 GB monthly data usage limit. This isn’t some scheme to reduce the load on Comcast’s network: The company said the current cap is business-related, not technical. [Ars Technica]


44 percent
Percentage of Americans who believe prostitution should be legal, according to a YouGov poll released Tuesday. About 50 percent of Democrats compared to 34 percent of Republicans support legalizing the world’s oldest profession. [YouGov]

102 courts
U.S. Tennis has been eclipsed in recent years by other countries, but the solution of “throw a bunch of money at the problem until it’s fixed” has actually gone pretty well. Team USA is opening a $60 million training facility in Florida with 102 courts, a substantial upgrade from the eight courts at its current facility. [The New York Times]

381

Wikipedia axed 381 editor accounts believed to have accepted pay in exchange for editing articles to promote customers. [Motherboard]

14,300 restaurants
CNBC broke the greatest story of my lifetime yesterday with the announcement that McDonald’s franchisees voted to serve all-day breakfast. The change will occur at about 14,300 restaurants. Please alert Donald Trump that his run for the presidency has been an unmitigated success — we have made America truly great again. The change goes into effect Oct. 6. [CNBC]

$500,000
The News Guild, a union that has traditionally focused on newspaper employees, is investing $500,000 in an effort to unionize digital newsrooms. Recently, employees of Gawker and Vice Media have voted to join the rival union Writers Guild of America-East. [Politico Media]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

1 paid staffer

Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry’s presidential campaign appears to be in dire straits: His polling numbers are negligible (they’re in rounding-error territory) and according to reports from Perry aides, he’s down to a single paid staffer in the entire state of Iowa. Basically barring a huge turnaround, Perry is that kid from “The Hunger Games” who fell for the ol’ “big pile of shiny weapons” trick in the first five minutes. [USA Today]


2.1 percent

Increase in revenue collected in Colorado from alcohol excise taxes from June 2014 through May 2015. Reminder that Colorado legalized marijuana, so this is good news for a local alcohol industry worried that cannabis would cut into its market. So far at least, marijuana has not stopped the rest of the intoxicant industry from expanding. I don’t normally do calls to action here, but you really need to read this story if only to see the greatest use of the idiom “a high tide lifts all boats.” [The Guardian]

11 turnovers
Ladies and gentlemen who support the Washington NFL team, please allow me to re-introduce your starting quarterback: Kirk Cousins, who had 11 turnovers in five games last year. Apparently head coach Jay Gruden elected to sit anticipated starter Robert Griffin III for the first game of the year in favor of Cousins, despite urging from management to play RG3. [ESPN]

23 percent

According to a new poll, the support among likely Iowa caucus-goers for GOP candidate Ben Carson, a neurosurgeon. Carson is tied with Donald Trump. [Monmouth University]


29 districts
For the first time ever, Singapore will have a two-or-more party contest in each of its 29 districts in an upcoming election. The politics of the city-state has been dominated by the unbroken rule of the People’s Action Party, but following the demise of the party’s longtime leader in March, other parties have seen an opportunity to compete. [Bloomberg]

75 percent
A proposed takeover bid of third-party travel booking site Orbitz by competitor Expedia could result in a company that controls about 75 percent of the domestic market in the field, according to research from Phocuswright. This potential deal has put hoteliers on notice, with many trying to find legal ways to attract and keep customers with factors other than price. [The New York Times]

80 percent

Efficiency of a Swiss “solar sunflower” design for solar energy collection. The apparatus, which kind of looks like a satellite dish hooked up to a disco ball, is able to produce 12kW of electricity and 21kW of thermal energy. It’s still pricier per watt than cheap solar cells, but its efficiency is intriguing — and it’s pretty to look at. [Ars Technica]


$100 gift cards
Jeep really, really wants to get recalled vehicles into the shop, and to make sure owners get around to bringing in their cars for necessary repairs, the company has resorted to giving out $100 gift cards. [Bloomberg]

500 calorie limit
A New York City council member wants to cap the nutritional intake on fast food children’s meals at 500 calories. I can see an argument in favor of that, sure, but Council Member Benjamin J. Kallos also wants to mess with the macronutrient composition of food by capping fat content. The last time the government tried to pull that off, things went pretty badly. [New York Observer]

1,279 career rushing attempts
The NFL’s oldest running back, Fred Jackson, was cut from the Buffalo Bills Monday after almost a decade with the team. Jackson, a fan favorite, was the top rusher for Buffalo last year. “F—ing Bills,” added local political reporter and Buffalo fan Harry Enten. “If they go 7-9 and cut Fred Jackson I will be so pissed,” Enten added in a late-night message. [ESPN]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




