
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
$3.94
A congressman who swiped the Pope’s water glass following the pontiff’s address to Congress will owe the House Clerk $3.94. It’s nice to know obsessive fandom is weird no matter how elevated the fan. [The Washington Post]

40 percent
The percentage of Americans who have “a great deal” or “a fair amount” of trust in the mass media, down from a high of 55 percent in 1999. Uh, you guys trust me, right? [Gallup]

60 percent
The share of Americans in a new Pew survey who said any budget that passes Congress must include funding for Planned Parenthood. About 32 percent said Congress should eliminate funding. [Pew Research Center]

77-19
The Senate voted 77-19 on Monday to pass a spending bill that would keep the government open through Dec. 11. The measure passed after a passage stripping federal funding for Planned Parenthood was removed from it. Of course, we’ll go through all of this again in December. [Associated Press]

94.6 percent
The House Republicans’ “Party Unity Score” in the 113th Congress whenever they were voting against Democrats, a testament to Speaker John Boehner’s proficiency at keeping his party in line. Although, that consensus did not keep together as well when a majority of both parties took the same side in a vote. [FiveThirtyEight]

1,500 jobs
Whole Foods is cutting 1,500 jobs over the next several months, roughly 1.6 percent of its work force, following a disappointing quarter for sales. [Fast Company]

2.5 million advertisers
Facebook has 2.5 million advertisers, up from one million in June 2013. Mobile ads account for about 76 percent of Facebook’s ad revenue. [Marketing Land]

3.3 million cars
And the Volkswagen story gets a little worse: Subsidiaries Audi and Skoda say they have a total of 3.3 million cars on the road that used the same software that lied about emissions data as their parent used. About 2.1 million of those are Audis. [BBC]

13 million iPhones
Apple announced it sold 13 million iPhone 6s and 6s Plus’s during their initial launch weekend, beating all previous iPhone opening weekends. [The Next Web]

$57 million
Medium, the online publishing platform, raised $57 million in its second funding round. [Re/code]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4.8 percent
That’s how much fast-food breakfast sales rose from 2007 to 2012, a bright spot for the sector amid increased competition in the lunch and dinner hours from fast-casual restaurants. Growth in breakfast sales is one of the reasons we’re going to see all-day breakfast at McDonald’s in a little more than a week. [Eater]

20 percent
Last week was Premiere Week, when TV networks debut new seasons and new shows, and it left the networks worried. The first two days of the new TV season saw a 20 percent drop in 18- to 24-year-old viewers compared to 2014. [Ad Age]

26 pounds of marijuana
That’s how much pot landed on the car port of a home in Nogales, Arizona, a town near the Mexican border. It’s believed to have been dropped accidentally from a drug-smuggling aircraft, but I have a personal theory: It’s proof that God exists and loves us very much. [Yahoo! News]

1,756 days
Number of days John Boehner of Ohio will have served as Speaker of the House of Representatives when he resigns on Oct. 30, the 12th longest stint with the gavel in the chamber’s history. Boehner announced his intention to resign this past Friday. [FiveThirtyEight]

400 train stations
Google is partnering with Indian Railways and a local ISP to bring free high-speed Internet to 400 train stations across India. Meanwhile, I still can’t get service in the Times Square N train station. [CNET]

667-foot condominium tower
Remember that “Ground Zero mosque” controversy? The time some folks tried to build an Islamic community center in the vague vicinity of lower Manhattan, and people from out of town got upset? Well, the property owner is now proposing to build a 667-foot condominium tower there — the formal end of the life cycle all buildings in New York undergo on a long enough time span. Once a Burlington Coat Factory caterpillar, soon to be a luxury condo butterfly. I hope you’re happy. [Bloomberg News]

4,646 calls
ZVRS, which runs a service that allows the hearing disabled to make phone calls by teleconferencing with sign language interpreters, is suing a Brooklyn man. The man, ZVRS alleges, isn’t deaf and has made 4,646 calls in order to masturbate in front of the company’s interpreters. [New York Post]

2nd heart attack
A Colorado man survived his second heart attack in three years, thanks — in both cases — to the actions of the same co-worker. Lightening might not strike twice, but coronary disease does: Talk to your doctor today. [The Daily Sentinel]

33 million
“Obamacare” helped add nine million people to the health insurance rolls in 2014. But 33 million still went without insurance for the entire year, and new data shows they were mostly poor, black and Hispanic. [FiveThirtyEight]

$42.5 million
Adam Sandler’s “Hotel Transylvania 2” won the box office this past weekend, bringing in $42.5 million, a new record opening for the garbage month of September. Anne Hathaway’s “The Intern” came in second, the latest and coolest installment in Hathaway’s hot streak. [Variety]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 hour, 12 minutes
This Sunday, it’s supermoon versus eclipse! For over an hour, the supermoon — a full moon occurring when the moon is closest in its orbit to Earth — will be blocked by our planet’s shadow in a total lunar eclipse. This hasn’t happened in more than 30 years. [NASA]

13 minutes, 22 seconds
In a valiant effort to dispel the Curse of the Billy Goat, five Chicago Cubs fans — who are also competitive eaters — devoured a 40-pound goat in 13 minutes and 22 seconds. The Cubs will likely play the Pittsburgh Pirates in the National League wild-card game on Oct. 7. [Wall Street Journal]

20 percent
During his first visit to the United States, Pope Francis exhorted bishops to help priests devote more time to caring for their parishioners’ spiritual needs. But that might be difficult: 20 percent of parishes have no priest in residence, wrote my colleague Leah Libresco. That number is up from about 5 percent just 30 years ago. [FiveThirtyEight]

360 pounds of cocaine
It’s fall! That means pumpkin spice lattes and decorative gourd season. But some gourds have been used for something else. Officials discovered 360 pounds of cocaine, worth more than $6 million, in a shipment of pumpkins and squash arriving at the Port of Philadelphia. It was the eighth-largest cocaine seizure at the port ever. [Associated Press]

At least 717 people
A stampede during Islam’s annual hajj pilgrimage to Mecca killed at least 717 people and left more than 850 injured. The stampede happened less than two weeks after a crane crashed into Mecca’s Grand Mosque, killing more than 100 people. [New York Times]

$5,679
Singer Meghan Trainor’s “All About That Bass” has been played 178 million times on music streaming services. But the song’s co-writer, Kevin Kadish, says he’s received just $5,679 as a result. That works out to $0.00003 per stream. [Quartz]

7,000 cops
Pope Francis is currently in New York City. And he’s not traveling alone. At least 7,000 New York Police Department officers will be on duty for the visit. There will be “a lot of overtime,” Police Commissioner Bill Bratton said. [New York Daily News]

2 million refugees
Turkey has taken in 2 million Syrian and Iraqi refugees and spent $7.6 billion to care for them — but they can’t stay. They are not allowed to seek asylum, and work permits are hard to obtain. Many plan to risk their lives to get to Greece, according to experts. [NPR]

240 million cousins
Hey, you, we’re cousins. A.J. Jacobs, an editor at large for Esquire, is showing exactly how, by helping build a family tree of the entire human race. So far, it contains 240 million people. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
Nearly 2 years
Two Al Jazeera journalists — Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed — were pardoned and released from prison nearly two years after being arrested in Egypt. The journalists had been accused of aiding the outlawed Muslim Brotherhood. Their release came just before the Muslim holiday Eid al-Adha, traditionally a time of charity and clemency. [CNN]

4 balls
Houston Astros outfielder Preston Tucker walked after being thrown four balls in a game against the Los Angeles Angels. Totally unremarkable and utterly unworthy of this venerable column — save for the fact that it took a call to New York and about three minutes to get him to first base. Home plate umpire Ted Barrett had lost track of the count. When nothing happened after ball four, Houston manager A.J. Hinch challenged, and a video review ensued. [Deadspin]

4 states
Pity those from New York, Louisiana, Minnesota, New Hampshire and American Samoa (your pitiful columnist included). Starting in 2016, residents of those places will no longer be able to use their driver licenses to fly domestically. Getting a license in those places doesn’t require proof of citizenship or residency, so they’ve been deemed “noncompliant” with the Real ID Act. Now, where did I put my passport? [Travel + Leisure]

46 percent
4.6 million people tuned in to watch Donald Trump on “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert” on Tuesday, a 46 percent increase from the previous Tuesday. The more than 300 million Americans who didn’t tune in? Losers. [Deadline Hollywood]

60 miles
Scientists at the National Institute of Standards and Technology have broken the distance record for quantum teleportation, transporting quantum information over 60 miles. It’s a possible step toward a quantum Internet. Now if they could only teleport me to the office today to avoid the papal traffic. C’mon, guys — it’s only 10 miles. [Gizmodo]

150 people
“Chances are, there are about 150 people whose names and faces you can remember without a prompt,” wrote my colleague Mona Chalabi in an article about memory. OK, that’s all well and good — but, Mona, seriously, where did I put my passport? [FiveThirtyEight]

284 communities
During the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, nearly 300 communities in Liberia that had ended the practice of open defecation remained free of infections despite being “surrounded by Ebola hotspots.” [The World Post]

$1.6 million
Joe Juranitch, who played the character Ragnar — a Viking atop a purple motorcycle — at Minnesota Vikings home games, sought a 10-year, $1.6 million contract from the team, $2 million if you include the postseason. Spoiler alert: Joe Juranitch no longer has a gig with the Vikings. [Associated Press]

5.6 million sets of fingerprints
In July, we learned that hackers had stolen about a million sets of fingerprints from the federal Office of Personnel Management. Turns out the hackers had their hands in a lot more — hands. On Wednesday, the government revealed that the number of federal employees whose fingerprints were stolen was actually 5.6 million. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5 goals
Robert Lewandowski, a striker for Bayern Munich, scored a ludicrous five goals in nine minutes in a match against Wolfsburg. [Digg]

12.5 percent
Facebook is expanding its Instant Articles feature, which means that more users will be reading stories that publishers post directly to the social network. The feature will initially be available on 12.5 percent of iOS devices, but if successful, that’s set to rise. [Mashable]

17 percent
The percentage of seniors in a survey of 27 universities who reported experiencing sexual assault by force or incapacitation while at college. [FiveThirtyEight]

86 percent
Pope Francis is in the United States! About 86 percent of U.S. Catholics have a favorable view of the pontiff. [Pew Research Center]

750 rhinos
The number of rhinos that have been poached from Kruger National Park in South Africa this year. [CNN]

More than 50,000
The number of people who have joined the Labour Party in the U.K. since left-winger Jeremy Corbyn took over Sept. 12. That is more than the entire membership of the U.K. Independence Party. Total membership for Labour is now about 360,000. [The Independent]

120,000 asylum seekers
The European Union approved a plan for 120,000 asylum seekers to be apportioned among member-states. [The New York Times]

$79 billion
In South Korea, a chaebol is a family-owned conglomerate, and one of them — Lotte Group, the fifth-largest — is enduring some corporate “Game of Thrones”-level scheming, with one heir to the empire cutting out his brother and father from the management of the $79 billion company in a bid to take control of it. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5 pounds per day
America is sending garbage to landfills at a clip of 5 pounds per person per day, according to a new study by researchers at Yale. [Associated Press]

2 months
Dallas Cowboys quarterback Tony Romo fractured his collarbone Sunday in a game against the Eagles and is expected to be out for at least two months. Dallas is down both Romo and star receiver Dez Bryant, the Eagles are a sinking ship of Theseus, New York is incapable of understanding the finite nature of time, and Washington is 1-1. I hate to consider this, but this may well be D.C.’s year in the NFC East. [Associated Press]

27 seconds
At the San Diego Senior Olympics, Don Pellmann, who recently turned 100 years old, became the first centenarian to run the 100-meter dash in less than 27 seconds. Don’t skip leg day, friends. [The New York Times]

30 percent
Increase in the amount of federal funding going to states from fiscal year 2008 to 2015, the vast majority of it related to health-care spending. [Pew Charitable Trusts]

52 percent
Potatoes and tomatoes account for 52 percent of America’s vegetable consumption, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. About 70 percent of potatoes and 77 percent of tomatoes that Americans consume are frozen or processed. Essentially, America gets lots of its vegetables from ketchup and fries. [The Washington Post]

70 days
Scott Walker called it quits Monday, suspending his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination after only 70 days. For some perspective, Kim Kardashian was married to Kris Humphries for 72 days. [The Week]

$750
The company that recently acquired Daraprim — a drug used to treat a life-threatening parasitic infection — raised the price of the medication overnight, from $13.50 per tablet to $750. [The New York Times]

$30 million
Headspace, a startup that sells guided meditation sessions, raised $30 million from several venture capital firms and celebrities, just the latest example of the growing power of the Meditation Industrial Complex. [TechCrunch]

$30 billion
How much revenue mobile games are expected to book in 2015. The highest-grossing game of last year, Clash of Clans, pulled in $1.8 billion alone. The medium is running laps around traditional console gaming, and Apple is hoping to capture some of these casual gamers with its redesigned TV product, which will have gaming options. [NPR]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
11.5 percent
Rich kids and poor kids get about the same share of their calories from eating fast food: 11.5 percent for children ages 2 to 19 from households with lower incomes and 13 percent for those from households with higher ones. In the end, an affinity for partially hydrogenated soybean oil, mechanically separated chicken, pasteurized cheese product and high fructose corn syrup brings this nation together regardless of our backgrounds. [Bloomberg]

12 Emmys
HBO’s “Game of Thrones” has made Emmy history, with a record 12 wins in one year: eight at the creative technical awards and an additional four at the main show on Sunday night. The previous record-holder was “The West Wing” with nine. The other big winner of the night was miniseries “Olive Kitteridge,” also from HBO. [MTV]

15 percent
Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina is enjoying a postdebate surge in the polls. In a new CNN/ORC poll that was taken in the three days after the most recent Republican presidential debate, Fiorina received 15 percent, which put her in second place, behind Donald Trump. Earlier this month, she had been polling at 3 percent. [Politico]

More than $100,000
Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker’s presidential campaign may have hit a bump. In the same CNN/ORC poll that had Carly Fiorina at 15 percent, he received less than 1 percent of the vote. This is bad news in light of the revelation last week that the Republican’s campaign owes several vendors “more than $100,000.” [The Associated Press]

87 players
As part of the effort to understand the effects that a career in football can have on the brain, 91 former players, many of whom suspected they had suffered from traumatic head injuries, donated their brains to researchers for testing after their deaths. The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Boston University have announced that 87 of those former players had chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE. [ESPN]

15,000
The U.S. will admit up to 100,000 refugees in fiscal year 2017, up 15,000 from a cap of 85,000 in 2016. The cap is 70,000 in the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30. The increase is due in part to the commitment from the Obama administration to admit 10,000 Syrian refugees. [The Washington Post]

$109,467
Average salary of a custodian in the New York City public school system in the 2013-14 school year. [The New York Post]

$4.5 million
The National Zoo has received an additional $4.5 million from philanthropist David Rubenstein for panda conservation. The news comes after the recent birth of a cub at the zoo. Pandas — as far as I can ascertain from reading lots of news reports about them — require a gigantic pile of American currency to mate successfully in captivity. Reminder that pandas had little trouble having sex without humanity’s financial aid and that the only reason we had to turn our National Zoo into an Ailuropoda love shack is rampant deforestation and the systematic annihilation of their natural environment. [Washingtonian]

$3.3 billion
Coca-Cola reported that the IRS is asking the company for $3.3 billion in additional taxes related to its overseas profits. Coke doesn’t think it owes the money. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
8 minutes 29 seconds
We’re still talking abut the GOP debate? Sure, I guess we are. By NPR’s reckoning, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker had the least speaking time of any candidate, with only 8 minutes 29 seconds in what was essentially a three-hour affair. Needless to say, Walker aides are not thrilled that their candidate — who is doing decently in the polls — was largely overlooked on national television. [POLITICO]

12-point net unfavorable
Mayor Bill De Blasio is not doing well in favorability polls, even among New York City residents. A Quinnipiac poll found 49 percent of New Yorkers had an unfavorable opinion of the mayor, and only 37 percent of NYC respondents had a favorable opinion. [Quinnipiac University]

13th largest
Last week, the Tennessee Titans crushed the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 42-14. Tennessee’s win gave them the 13th-largest opening weekend bump in the Super Bowl era, according to the Elo power rating system. [FiveThirtyEight]

20th member
On Thursday, Rep. Darin LaHood of Illinois was sworn in to the U.S. House of Representatives, making this week the first time that the House has had a full 435 members since the beginning of the session. LaHood is the son of former Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood, himself a former congressman. The younger Rep. LaHood is the 20th member of the current House of Representatives who is a child of a former member. Remember, kids, anything is possible if you follow your dreams, but it’s a lot more possible if your dad had the job you want. [@GregGiroux]

6,000
Sen. Susan Collins of Maine is very good at showing up to votes; on Thursday the senator was recognized for attending her 6,000th consecutive vote. There are two senators who have cast even more in a row: sitting Sen. Chuck Grassley and late Sen. William Proxmire. [National Journal]

11,000 feet
On Thursday NASA released pictures from the New Horizons probe’s Pluto flyby. The terrain of the ex-planet is studded with glaciers and icy mountains that are up to 11,000 feet high. [NASA]

£100,000
A U.K. wine bar served an 18-year old woman a shot of alcohol containing liquid nitrogen in 2012, which led to the victim needing to have her ruptured stomach removed. This week the bar — Oscar’s Wine Bar in Lancaster— was fined £100,000 over the failure to ensure the safety of the cocktail. [BBC]

22.9 million
Audience for Wednesday’s CNN GOP primary debate, the largest audience for any event in the history of the network. [The New York Times]

260 million years old
Bunostegos akokanensis is a pre-reptile life form that lived on land 260 million years ago. A new analysis of the creature’s bones led researchers to conclude that the Permian-era animal is the earliest known to stand upright on all four legs. [Science Daily]

$940 million
The U.S. government settled with more than 600 Native American tribes to the tune of $940 million, clearing a longstanding lawsuit that claimed the federal government underpaid contracts under the Indian Self-Determination Act. [The StarTribune]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5 games
Since the end of the Bush administration, Washington’s football team has only been above average for five games, according to a new history of the NFL that my colleagues put together. That’s just one of countless ways you can insult division rivals thanks to our new mathematical system. Dallas, your team exemplified mediocrity in American sports from 2010 through 2014 and I now have the stats to prove it. [FiveThirtyEight]

5 hours, 20 minutes
Approximate number of hours that Republican debates took last night, with the first debate starting around 6 p.m. eastern and the finale wrapping up in the ballpark of 11:20 p.m. If you’re a political junkie or a masochist or probably both, be sure to read FiveThirtyEight’s coverage of both debates. [FiveThirtyEight]

15-foot wave
A magnitude 8.3 earthquake in central Chile led to 15-foot waves in the city of Coquimbo. One million people have been evacuated in Chile, and the earthquake has also led to a tsunami advisory for the southern coast of California. [The Los Angeles Times]

40 times as much
A presidential primary debate is great for ratings, and in advance of last night’s congested affair CNN was reportedly making bank selling commercial time. Fox News’s debate was the ninth most-watched cable news broadcast ever, and in anticipation of sky-high viewership CNN was reportedly charging 40 times its normal advertising rate. If you saw a 30-second spot last night, it cost the advertiser somewhere from $150,000 to $200,000. [Marketplace]

82 percent
McDonalds has been complicating its menu in order to compete with new fast casual chains, and while there have been some successes for the company they’ve angered the franchisees who run 82 percent of the chain’s restaurants. I respect you all too much to unleash an “I’m hatin’ it” joke. [Bloomberg]

€136.20
Yale University has in its possession a 1,000 guilder bond that was issued on goatskin by de Stichtse Rijnlanden, the Dutch water authority, in 1648. Yale will receive 136.20 euros in interest from the bond this year. How many other pieces of goatskin are still moneymakers? [Bloomberg]

11,000
Approximate number of Super PAC ads that have aired for the 2016 GOP presidential election as of Monday. About 90 percent of them specifically targeted Iowa and New Hampshire, which will briefly be important in the national conversation for some time early next year before ebbing away. Then they’ll go back to being either that state we get corn from or the one our libertarian weed dealer moved to after college. [The Center for Public Integrity]

3 million
A new study published in the journal “Nature” estimates that there are 3 million premature deaths worldwide resulting from air pollution. As someone who lives in New Jersey and downwind from a coal plant, all I have to say is holy crap I need to move. [The Washington Post]

$75 million
Microsoft announced plans to invest $75 million over three years in computer science education for kids. It might want to start in Irving, Texas, where it seems like the cops and school administrators can’t tell an etch-a-sketch from an iPad. [USA Today]

$1.3 billion
The Department of Justice approved Expedia’s acquisition of travel booking site Orbitz Wednesday following an anti-trust investigation. Expedia will buy Orbitz for $1.3 billion, making the combined company the largest in its sector. [Reuters]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0.8 percent
Tonight CNN is broadcasting the second debate of the GOP primary, and there will be 11 candidates on one stage. But prior to that debate, we get another undercard! Rick Santorum, Gov. Bobby Jindal, Sen. Lindsay Graham, Jim Gilmore and George Pataki will have a smaller debate broadcast beforehand. Rick Santorum is dominating  that pack with a staggering 0.8 percent support, according to CNN’s average. [The Washington Post]

4th lowest
The arctic sea ice situation is not great. The National Snow and Ice Data Center reported that there were 1.7 million square miles of ice up north last week, the lowest this summer. That’s down 240,000 square miles from last year, and the fourth-lowest level on record. The all-time low occurred in 2012, when Earth had only 1.3 million square miles of ice. I have some ideas on how to fix this, but all of them are from that documentary “Frozen” (2013) so I may not actually be super helpful on this one. [Associated Press]

74 percent
Kim Davis’s hasn’t done many favors for “religious liberty.” After the Supreme Court ruling that made same-sex marriage legal all over the country, 49 percent of respondents to an AP poll said officials with religious objections shouldn’t be forced to give marriage licenses to same-sex couples. Now, after Kim Davis picked her hill to jail on, an ABC News poll found that 74 percent of respondents said that equality should win out. [Slate]

85 percent
Percentage of parents of high-school aged kids who said that computer science courses were just as, or more, important than classes like math, science, history and English, according to a new survey from Gallup and Google. [Quartz]

400 percent
That’s the nationwide increase in calls to poison control hotlines about kids younger than 12 drinking alcoholic hand sanitizer. [CNN]

690 people
A new case of Ebola claimed a life in Sierra Leone, leading the Ebola Response Centre to put the 690 people who lived in the same village as the victim into isolation for three weeks. Sierra Leone was one of the nations to suffer most from the disease’s outbreak in December 2013, and was considered Ebola-free last month. [Thomson Reuters]

2,159
That’s how many CNN reports have focused on Donald Trump since he announced his intention to run for president, roughly double that of Jeb Bush and more than 5 times as many as Ted Cruz. Give the people what they want, you know? [The Wall Street Journal]

30,000 jobs
Hewlett-Packard is splitting up, and up to 30,000 layoffs were announced at HP Enterprise, one of the forthcoming sibling companies. Prior to the layoffs, there were about 252,000 workers moving to the new company. [Associated Press]

91,000 cans
Do you like Metallica, Budweiser, and Canada? Well buckle up for the greatest promotion of your lifetime. The Metallica logo will appear on roughly 91,000 cans of Budweiser that have been canned after feeling the vibrations of Metallica themselves. A tanker truck of the swill will be parked outside a Canadian arena where Metallica is playing, and the beer will be canned only after it soaks up all that metal. [The AV Club]

$374 billion
Prescription drug spending in the U.S. in 2014, a 13 percent increase over the previous year. That is the highest increase since 2001. [Marketwatch]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
