
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

2 weeks
Canada is streamlining its visa process for international tech workers, with the goal of getting work permits to them within two weeks. Tech companies hope to capitalize on concerns about President Trump’s stance on restricting immigration to the U.S. [NPR]

40 hours
A Montana congressman-elect who assaulted a journalist was ordered to pay $385, get 20 hours of anger management counseling and complete 40 hours of community service. Republican Greg Gianforte won a special election soon after the assault. [BBC]

129-120
The Golden State Warriors beat the Cleveland Cavaliers 129-120 Monday night in Oakland to win the NBA championship, taking the series 4-1. [ESPN]

4,000
A Qatari businessman is airlifting 4,000 cows into the desert to kick-start a local dairy industry amid a blockade that’s preventing the country from getting dairy products from Saudi Arabia. It will take about 60 flights, but God, the movie rights alone will probably keep Moutaz Al Khayyat in the black on this play. [Bloomberg]

21 million square feet
New retail space in the Cleveland area from 2000 through the first quarter of this year. That increased the amount of retail space by 21 percent just as e-commerce began to make retail space less valuable, and retail space has outpaced demand in much of the rest of the country too. Sure, brick-and-mortar stores have been hurt by online shopping, but the recent problems for malls and other shopping centers are far from entirely external. [Bloomberg]

$165 million
Art collector and philanthropist Agnes Gund sold the 1962 painting “Masterpiece” by Roy Lichtenstein for $165 million to raise money for criminal justice reform. That’s among the top 15 highest prices ever known to be paid for a piece of art. [The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

4 years
After the announcement that President Trump will pull the U.S. out of the Paris climate accord, French President Emmanuel Macron announced that his government would offer four-year grants to researchers, teachers and students to live and work in France in the interest of climate research. [Business Insider]

6 awards
“Dear Evan Hansen” won in six categories at the Tony Awards on Sunday night, including best new musical. [The New York Times]

32 percent
Employment in residential specialty trades is way up compared with the end of 2011, when the job market for home renovators bottomed out in the aftermath of the housing crash and recession. Employment in the category has risen 32 percent since then, to just under 2 million jobs in May. Private employment overall rebounded 12 percent in the same period. [Bloomberg]

47
Number of U.S. counties where no health plans have signed up to sell coverage on the 2018 Affordable Care Act marketplace. [Vox]

415 to 445
Emmanuel Macron, who won the presidency of France in May, saw his centrist party score a smashing victory in the French parliamentary election Sunday. La Republique En Marche is expected to end up with an estimated majority of 415 to 445 seats in the 577-seat lower house when the country finishes voting next weekend. [CNN]

$174 million
Tom Cruise’s “The Mummy” tanked in the United States and Canada, pulling a measly $32 million this past weekend and losing to “Wonder Woman,” which is in its second week. The film was Cruise’s strongest opening weekend internationally — its release was timed simultaneously across markets — with an international gross of $142 million. [The Numbers]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

-12 seats
When Conservative Prime Minister Theresa May called a snap election in April, her party had 330 seats in Parliament, slightly more than the 326 required for a majority. Expecting she could beat Labor soundly and bolster her support, she called an unscheduled election. This went extremely badly for her. With some results still being finalized, Conservatives lost 12 seats in Thursday’s election; Labour gained 31. Conservatives can still form a government, but they’ll need help. [Bloomberg, FiveThirtyEight]

2nd longest break
President Trump may be a Twitter addict, but he just refrained from firing off any 140-character thoughts for one of the longest stretches of time since launching his bid for the presidency. As of earlier today, his most recent tweet was Wednesday, and despite reports he considered live-tweeting the congressional testimony of his fired FBI director, POTUS had been mum. Until, that is, he re-entered the fray at 6:10 a.m. Eastern this morning. [The Washington Post]

13 non-answers
Number of questions former FBI Director James Comey would not answer or comment on in a public setting, according to a FiveThirtyEight search through a transcript of the Senate Intelligence Committee hearing. Catch up on the blockbuster testimony here. [FiveThirtyEight]

35 seats
Theresa May’s Conservatives weren’t the only losers in U.K.’s snap election on Thursday. The Scottish National Party lost 19 seats; they’re expected to end up with about 35 seats in Parliament. This is a major setback for the Scottish independence movement. [Bloomberg]

65 percent
Probability the Golden State Warriors defeat the Cleveland Cavaliers tonight to sweep the entire NBA playoffs. [FiveThirtyEight]

233 Republicans
The House of Representatives voted to roll back some of the main regulations contained in the 2010 Dodd-Frank law, implemented after the 2008 financial crisis. It was an almost perfect party-line vote, 233-186. Among members who voted on the legislation, all 185 Democrats were opposed and all but one Republican was in favor. [Greg Giroux, The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 euro
A Spanish bank, Banco Popular Espanol SA, will be bought by Banco Santander SA for 1 euro. The Single Resolution Board, the European group that deals with bank failures, brokered the deal. [Bloomberg]

3-0
We all remember when the Golden State Warriors blew a 3-1 lead in the NBA finals to the Cleveland Cavaliers last year. Who could forget? This year, though, the Warriors are one win away from going undefeated for the entire playoffs after a comeback 118-113 victory over LeBron James and whomever he’s carpooling to the arena with these days. [ESPN]

51 percent
Percentage of Republicans who oppose same-sex marriage. [Public Religion Research Institute]

$500
A peacock broke into a liquor store in Arcadia, California. There was an inept capture attempt, a feisty peacock counterattack, and $500 of liquor hitting the floor. The video is priceless. [Yahoo News]

$12.1 million
How much a NBA Finals Game 5 in Oakland would bring to the Golden State Warriors. Here’s the issue: There might not be a Game 5. In fact, if the Warriors sweep the Cavs, the Warriors’ ownership will miss out on the more than $22 million they would have brought in had the series gone to a Game 7. [ESPN]

$17 billion
Estimate from the Obama White House of how much money Americans lost annually because of conflicts of interest among financial advisers. Wall Street groups say that estimate is too high. Academics say it’s too low. The Obama administration’s Fiduciary rule — which requires advisers to have a fiduciary responsibility to act in the best interests of their clients when dealing with retirement accounts — is set to take partial effect on Friday. But it may be short-lived: President Trump ordered that the rule be reevaluated. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

4 home runs
Congratulation to Scooter Gennett of the Cincinnati Reds, who last night tied the MLB record for home runs in a single game, knocking four out of the park. [ESPN]

47 percent and 48 percent
On Tuesday, Democrat Phil Murphy (a Goldman Sachs alumni) and Republican Kim Guadagno (Gov. Chris Christie’s lieutenant governor) won their respective primaries for New Jersey’s gubernatorial election. Murphy won with 48 percent, and Guadagno won with 47 percent. They’ll meet in the general election in November; polls show Murphy as the favorite. [NJ.com, FiveThirtyEight]

$609
Cost of a box of two Epi-pens. Still. As The New York Times wrote, “Though this simple medical device contains only about $1 of the drug epinephrine, the company that sells it, Mylan, earned the public’s enmity and lawmakers’ scrutiny after ratcheting up prices to $609 a box.” Despite that outcry, the price remains. [The New York Times]

1,000 jobs
EPA administrator Scott Pruitt claimed on at least three occasions that the U.S. has created 50,000 coal and mining jobs under President Trump. The figure is, in fact, 1,000 jobs — a bit short of 50,000 and even short of the 1,400 such jobs created in the last four months of the Obama administration. [Quartz, The Washington Post]

$1.2 million
According to a Forbes report, the Trump Organization may have gained $1.2 million intended for the St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital through the annual Eric Trump Foundation golf invitational. [Forbes]

$1.2 billion
A controversial set of tax cuts from five years ago that drove the state of Kansas into a devastating fiscal hole are on their way out. State legislators voted on Tuesday to override Gov. Brownback’s veto of a bill to raises taxes by $1.2 billion. [The Hill]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.
Are you or do you know a DJ who works weddings? We need a favor.

44 percent
Traffic decrease from Google to the Wall Street Journal after the latter began blocking Google users from reading the site for free. Still, Journal subscriptions went up as a result. [Bloomberg]

44.1 percent
FiveThirtyEight launched a new interactive on Monday to track the national generic congressional ballot (a recurring poll question that asks people whether they would support an unnamed Democrat or an unnamed Republican in their congressional district). Democrats lead the GOP 44.1 percent to 36.9 percent, as of Monday evening. [FiveThirtyEight]

442 non-nominees
President Trump slammed Democrats on Monday for not approving his ambassadors quickly enough. It’s an odd complaint because ambassadors can get through Senate confirmation with zero Democratic support (diplomatic nominees can’t be filibustered), and the actual bottleneck appears to be at the White House: The administration has not yet picked a nominee for 442 of 559 key government positions requiring Senate affirmation. [Yahoo]

$60,000
Approximate amount a drug dealer can make from a kilogram of heroin costing around $4,000. This is done by diluting the pure product. With a kilogram of the far more potent fentanyl (which also costs about $4,000), that dealer can make $1.2 million. This financial incentive is one of many things driving the U.S. opioid crisis. And because fentanyl is far stronger than heroin, it’s also far deadlier. [BuzzFeed]

$2.2 billion
There are major hunger crises in South Sudan, Nigeria, Yemen and Somalia. The United Nations set a goal to raise $6.1 billion to address the crises; so far, only $2.2 billion has been pledged. [The Washington Post]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.
Are you or do you know a DJ who works weddings? We need a favor.

5 nations
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and Egypt have cut diplomatic ties to Qatar, accusing the nation of supporting terrorism and destabilizing the area. Saudi Arabia is closing its land border with Qatar, and the rest of the nations are cutting air and sea travel to and from the country. [The New York Times]

30-40 seats
A snap election intended to broaden the Conservative Party’s lead in the U.K. parliament has instead thrown 30 or 40 normally safe seats into play, according to internal Tory estimates. We’ll see how the polls manage this time. [Business Insider, FiveThirtyEight]

30 mayors
In a rebuke to President Trump, a group of 30 U.S. mayors, a handful of governors, over 80 college presidents and a bunch of businesses are ready to commit to meeting the greenhouse gas emission targets set by the Paris climate accord. Trump withdrew the U.S. from the accord last week. [The New York Times]

35 percent
More women are being hired for top corporate legal jobs: 35 percent of new general counsel positions in Fortune 500 companies were filled by a woman in 2016, up from 24 percent in 2012. [Bloomberg BNA]

57 countries
The top song in 57 countries, including the U.S., is “Despacito,” a Spanish language track that features Justin Bieber. It’s the first Spanish language song to hit No. 1 in the U.S. since “Macarena” in 1996. [Bloomberg Businessweek]

$100.5 million
Women get very few opportunities to direct blockbuster Hollywood films. But “Wonder Woman,” directed by Patty Jenkins, handily won the weekend box-office, recording the best opening weekend for any movie with a female director. The well-reviewed movie is also a new beginning for the previously troubled DC Extended Universe. [FiveThirtyEight, AP News]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.
Are you or do you know a DJ who works weddings? We need a favor.

3
After President Trump announced yesterday he will pull the U.S. out of the Paris climate accord, 194 nations remain committed to the environmental pact. In leaving the agreement, the U.S. becomes one of only three nations that are not pledged to the accord. Syria and Nicaragua are the other two. [Bradd Jaffy, FiveThirtyEight]

3.6 percent
Percentage of Americans who have food allergies or sensitivities. A study found 97,482 people who had an intolerance or allergy after analyzing 2.7 million medical records. [NPR]

$94
Blue Apron, the upscale meal ingredient delivery service, spends $94 on marketing for each customer, which seems high to everyone except those who subscribe to podcasts. They recoup it pretty quickly if the customer sticks around long enough. [Erin Griffith, SEC]

150,000
Annual number of employees who go through Walmart’s 200 “Walmart Academy” training centers. The company announced it will soon incorporate virtual reality headsets as teaching aids. [TechCrunch]

$70 billion
Apple reported that app developers have earned a cumulative $70 billion since the launch of the company’s app store in 2008. [Apple]

$7.4 billion
Forecast for the size of the cosmetics market in China in 2021, up from $4.3 billion last year. Sales are up for major cosmetics companies and poised to continue to rise. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.
Are you or do you know a DJ who works weddings? We need a favor.

1 catfish
A man who put a catfish in his underpants, smuggled it into Game 1 of the Stanley Cup Final, and threw it on to the ice as an act of support for the Nashville Predators has been cleared of charges in Pittsburgh. The Nashville native was arrested for “disorderly conduct, possessing instruments of crime and disrupting meetings or processions.” In the meantime, he missed some seriously entertaining hockey. [AP News]

88 miles per hour
A person in California received a ticket for driving 88 miles per hour in a DeLorean. I thought we exhausted the overdone “Back to the Future” references back in 2015. [The Los Angeles Times]

1950
The worst band in America is suing a hotel in Mexico over trademark infringement. The Eagles inexplicably won a grammy for “Hotel California” in 1978, and are suing a hotel named “Hotel California” despite the fact that the origins of the hotel’s name go back to 1950. The hotel is ready to fight for its name, and FiveThirtyEight’s Significant Digits will be covering this news like the trial of the century it truly is. [Reuters]

$70 million
After three years of court battles with the FTC, Amazon agreed to pay $70 million to parents of children who made unauthorized in-app purchases. [Ars Technica]

$708 million
Uber posted a $708 million loss in the first quarter and announced its head of finance will leave the beleaguered company. [The Wall Street Journal]

$1.27 billion
The Department of Health and Human Services says the government may have overpaid the producer of the EpiPen by up to $1.27 billion in the 10-year period from 2006 to 2016. [Reuters]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

7-1
Yesterday, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of consumers in a 7-to-1 decision on a printer ink case that has ramifications on how third-party companies can build businesses that service bigger companies’ product lines. It came down to the rights of a patent-holder after its product is sold — in this case, can printer-maker Lexmark stop a third-party company from refilling its ink cartridges. [Consumerist, SCOTUSBlog]

$11
The Ivanka Trump brand, once a contender in the luxury market, has moved considerably downmarket over the past seven years. Ivanka Trump “fashion jewelry” can be found for a cool $11, despite once appealing to consumers who coveted $10,000 necklaces. [Bloomberg]

32 percent
We’re in the golden age of cheap chocolate, with a cocoa global surplus pushing prices down by 32 percent in the past year. That’s showing signs of ending, with cocoa futures up and prices set to rise. Imagine that it’s the day after Easter and you’re in the seasonal aisle at the CVS and you have even less self-control than usual — that is how you should be handling this news. [Bloomberg]

97 percent fresh
Don’t look now, but “Wonder Woman” is poised to be the best-reviewed D.C. Comics film in years, with a 97 percent fresh Rotten Tomatoes rating two days ahead of its release. Generally, that’s a great sign. [Rotten Tomatoes, FiveThirtyEight]

$1,000
That is a big, round, aesthetically pleasing number — catnip for stock traders. The financial world was agog yesterday when Amazon shares traded above $1,000 per share, a fundamentally meaningless threshold that nevertheless satisfies the ape parts of the human brain. [CNBC]

532,000 viewers
Average number of viewers aged 25 to 54 who were watching MSNBC in primetime on weeknights in the month of May. That number made MSNBC the top channel in cable news for the first time since September 2000. [Variety]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
