
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 to 2 minutes
A new study published in the Journal of Industrial Economics found that U.S. airline mergers have not had a major impact on flights’ on-time performance. [Futurity]

13.7 gigawatts
India has cancelled 13.7 gigawatts worth of new coal projects in the past month due to the plummeting price of solar energy. The energy market in India is volatile — just a few years ago, coal was en vogue. [India Times]

49 percent
Percentage of people who have refinanced their home in the first quarter of the year and cashed-out in the process. That’s the highest rate in the post-recession economy, up from 12 percent in mid-2012. In the run-up to the recession, that figure was often over 80 percent. [The Wall Street Journal]

281st place
Web traffic measurement is more art than science, but it’s clear that alt-right site Breitbart has taken a pretty big hit since President Trump was elected. Breitbart was riding high ahead of the inauguration — the 29th-most trafficked site on the web according to web-monitor Alexa — but it’s now down to 281st place. [Vanity Fair]

1,100
Number of lobbyists working in some capacity for the pharmaceutical business. The pharma and health products industry has upped its lobbying spending by 14 percent in the first quarter compared to last year, in part because both parties seem keen to rein in drug price rises. [The New York Times]

$18.1 million
“Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales” pulled in $77 million over the four-day holiday weekend, easily beating out “Baywatch” ($18.1 million) to win the weekend. [Variety]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

5 points
A YouGov poll puts the U.K. Labour Party at their highest level of support yet in forthcoming elections, just five points behind the Conservative Party, 43 to 38 percent. Election Day is June 8. [Britain Elects]

7 points
Republican candidate Greg Gianforte, who allegedly body-slammed a reporter for asking about the GOP health care repeal plan on Wednesday, won his election in Montana by about seven points and will now be Rep. Greg Gianforte, who allegedly body-slammed a reporter for asking about the GOP health care repeal plan. [FiveThirtyEight]

90 percent
Probability the Golden State Warriors beat the Cleveland Cavaliers in the NBA Finals. The prediction is based on FiveThirtyEight’s CARM-Elo projections, not historical indicators such as the Warriors blowing a 3-1 finals lead to the Cleveland Cavaliers but one year ago. [FiveThirtyEight]

205 pages
In a 205-page ruling, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit declined to reinstate President Trump’s ban on travel from six predominantly Muslim nations, calling it discriminatory. [The New York Times]

$500,000
Neil Gaiman, New York Times bestselling (and my favorite) author, will dramatically read the notoriously thorough Cheesecake Factory menu if a fundraiser for the U.N. High Commission on Refugees hits $500,000. [Boing Boing]

$2.5 billion
Offal is a huge market in China. The country imports $2.5 billion worth, about a quarter of its total meat imports. Offal accounts for about 70 percent of U.S. meat imports into China. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 misdemeanor
Greg Gianforte allegedly “body slammed” a reporter asking about the Congressional Budget Office’s analysis of the Republican health bill. Gianforte, the Republican nominee for Montana’s at-large congressional district, was charged with misdemeanor assault. Montana votes today. [Gabriel Debenedetti, The Guardian]

7 weeks
Venezuela’s economic catastrophe is creating political chaos as well, with seven weeks of mass protests that have at times turned violent. Protesters are demanding early elections to replace President Nicolas Maduro, whose approval ratings are at 10 to 15 percent. The government instead announced a vote for a “constituent assembly,” with election rules that critics say are designed to ensure Maduro can hold onto power. [The Washington Post, Caracas Chronicles]

52
The Nashville Predators are in the Stanley Cup Final and are fighting to end one of the sneakiest losing streaks in sports: Tennessee’s three pro sports franchises — the Titans, Predators and Grizzlies — have competed in 52 professional sports seasons and have won a championship in zero of them. [FiveThirtyEight]

80 percent
Annual turnover rate among truck drivers in large for-hire fleets. No, that is not a typo, and yes, that is a ridiculous turnover rate for a business to have. The long-haul trucking business is grueling and existentially threatened by emerging technologies. [The New York Times]

23 million
The report from the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office is in: The Republican bill to replace the Affordable Care Act would leave 23 million more people uninsured in 2026 compared to current law, cut Medicaid by $834 billion, and repeal taxes on high-income people to the tune of hundreds of billions of dollars. [CBO, FiveThirtyEight]

$2 trillion
The White House budget request released Monday double counts $2 trillion. It argues that the same $2,000,000,000,000 can pay for both a $2,000,000,000,000 tax cut and simultaneously a $2,000,000,000,000 budget balance. Using money twice is frowned upon in financial circles. [NBC News]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

$5
A U.S. court of appeals ruled you don’t have to register your drones with the Federal Aviation Administration because small drones are just model airplanes. Save the $5 on that registration. In other news, drones are about to get way more annoying. [Quartz]

60 days
Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte declared a 60-day period of martial law for the entirety of Mindanao island because of clashes between armed groups and the government. [ABS CBN]

80
More than 80 U.S. Olympians are reporting that their medals won at the Rio Olympics are flaking or otherwise degrading. Officials have observed problems on 6 to 7 percent of medals. [The Associated Press]

$900
Uber underpaid tens of thousands of New York City drivers by improperly basing their payments on net rather than gross fares. The controversial ride-sharing company has agreed to repay those lost earnings, an average of about $900 per driver. That’s tens of millions of dollars out of the pockets of drivers, finally reclaimed. [Quartz]

$5 million
Reported annual value of a contract between Nike and New York Giants wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr., the most lucrative shoe deal for an NFL player. [ESPN]

662 million vacation days
Number of available vacation days that Americans collectively did not take in 2016. Hit the beaches, people. [Fortune]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

12 years
At least 22 people were killed and dozens more were injured when an apparent suicide bomber attacked a crowd leaving an Ariana Grande concert in Manchester, England. Many of the victims were children and teenagers. It was Britain’s deadliest terrorist attack in 12 years. [The Guardian]

2 weeks
Approximate amount of time on the show gained by a contestant who wins a rose on a date on “The Bachelorette” or “The Bachelor,” according to a ridiculous-even-by-our-own-standards historical statistical analysis of the television programs. [FiveThirtyEight]

5th
Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser to President Trump, will invoke his Fifth Amendment rights and refuse to comply with a U.S. Senate subpoena for documents relating to Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election. [ABC News]

9/20/2019
You’re getting another Angry Birds movie. You probably didn’t want it, but whatever, you’re getting another feature length-film based on an app designed to extract microtransactions from the momentarily bored. So mark your calendars, or probably don’t, because on September 20, 2019, our society once again gets exactly what it deserves. [Venturebeat]

17 years
Fox News ranked third in prime time for five straight days behind CNN and MSNBC, the latter of which was the No. 1 cable news network in both the target 25-54 demographic and in total viewers for a full week. But back to Fox News: This is its longest stretch in third place in 17 years. [Variety]

22.8 million
Lyft rides in February 2017. That’s a 137 percent jump over February 2016, suggesting the company is profiting from the public embarrassments and scandals at rival Uber. [Bloomberg]

$627 billion
President Trump’s budget proposal is out Tuesday. It’s far from the final product, but it is a good road map to the administration’s priorities, which evidently include massive cuts to health and social safety net programs. Over 10 years the plan would cut $627 billion from Medicaid, $56 billion from Medicare, and $3.6 trillion overall. [The Washington Post]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

17 percent
Share of U.S. newlyweds in 2015 who were of differing races or ethnicities, up from 3 percent in 1967 when the Supreme Court ruled in Loving v. Virginia that interracial marriage was legal across the country. [Pew Research Center]

27.1 percent
Share of stock trading done by quantitative hedge funds as a percentage of the whole market in 2017. They’re beating out other hedge funds (22 percent), traditional asset managers (18.6 percent) and banks (3.4 percent). And really, what could go wrong with a powerful new technology dominating the way the international financial markets tick. [The Wall Street Journal]

28 House members and six senators
A Politico investigation found 28 House members and six senators who have traded over 100 stocks in the past two years, which while not illegal is definitely sketchy; in some cases, lawmakers traded stocks related to legislation they had influence over. [Politico]

47 times
CNN has found evidence that Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke plagiarized portions of his master’s thesis at the Naval Postgraduate School. CNN found at least 47 examples of Clarke failing to properly attribute his sources, which could pose a barrier for his appointment to a position in the Department of Homeland Security. [CNN]

50 percent
Approximate chance that a randomly selected packaged item in a supermarket will contain palm oil, the most-used cooking oil on the planet. Humans consumed on average 17 pounds each in 2015. [Bloomberg]

2018
Japan’s Emperor Akihito wants to quit, but there is no way for him to abdicate. A bill moving through parliament would allow him to leave the throne and pass it on to his son — December 2018 has been thrown around as a target date — on the condition that it’s a one-time thing. [The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

2-1
The Federal Communications Commission voted 2-1 Thursday to begin the process of eliminating protections and rules ensuring net neutrality. If you’ve got beef with this, the FCC is accepting comment until Aug. 16. [Ars Technica]

18
Reuters has reported that there were at least 18 previously undisclosed calls and emails between Michael Flynn and other Donald Trump campaign advisers and Russian officials or their affiliates in the final seven months of the 2016 presidential campaign. [Reuters]

18 months
Emojis represented on Google or Android devices look very different from their Microsoft or Apple counterparts, and over the past 18 months Google has undertaken a top-to-bottom redesign of its digital pictorial language. [Co. Design]

21 years
In what is officially my favorite story of 2017, King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands told a newspaper that he has been moonlighting as an airline pilot for KLM for more than 21 years. He initially took the job as a hobby, flying twice a month for the commercial airliner to chill out from his royal duties. [CNN]

2.7 million
Viewers of “The Tonight Show” with Jimmy Fallon. Recent data reveals that the show is taking a hit — or at least that its rivals, like “The Late Show” on CBS with Stephen Colbert, are getting a bump — possibly because of the program’s reluctance to get political and its early cozy handling of then-candidate Donald Trump. [The New York Times]

$1 billion
The Zhejiang Jinke Peroxide Co., a Chinese chemical company, paid $1 billion for a company behind a talking internet cat app and franchise. Several Chinese industrials have scooped up the rights to oddball Western entertainment properties. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

0.04 percent
Percentage of ad impressions that were billed incorrectly on Facebook as part of a bug that meant advertisers were overcharged. That seems small, and on the whole it is, but Facebook’s ad revenue hit nearly $8 billion last quarter, so even a tiny fraction of its ad impressions is a decent chunk of the internet. The company is offering refunds to affected advertisers. [CNN]

5.3 percent
A PwC study analyzing CEO changes at the 2,500 largest public companies in the world found that ethical lapses leading to dismissal were responsible for 5.3 percent of CEO turnover in 2012 to 2016, up more than a percentage point from the rate in 2007 to 2011. [PwC]

9 seasons
Bobby Moynihan, the second-longest-tenured current cast member of “Saturday Night Live,” will leave the show after Saturday’s season finale. He’s landed a sitcom over at CBS for the fall. [Variety]

20 percent
North American tree populations are moving westward. Scientists think that 20 percent of the observations in their study of the trend are explainable by changes in precipitation tied to climate change — but that other 80 percent of the reason trees are fleeing the coast? There are still a bunch of questions. [The Atlantic]

128 blood tests
Certain lead tests from Magellan Diagnostics can provide inaccurate blood lead levels, government agencies said Wednesday. In Flint, Michigan, which has had serious problems with the presence of lead in the water, 128 tests were done with the potentially faulty Magellan kits. [MLive]

$19 million
Cheddar, a financial news streaming service startup, pulled in $19 million in funding to a valuation of $85 million. [Talking Biz News]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

40 percent
That’s the percentage of working Americans ages 25 to 29 who had at least a bachelor’s degree in 2016. That’s higher than the share of working 25- to 29-years-olds in 2000, 1985 and 1964. [Pew Research Center]

49-38
A new Public Policy Polling survey has control of the House of Representatives in play in the 2018 midterms, with Democrats up 49 to 38 in the generic congressional ballot. [Public Policy Polling]

$50,000
An international ransomware attack that hacked and encrypted files in an attempt to shake down users for bitcoin doesn’t appear to have been financially fruitful, with analysts saying only about $50,000 in ransoms had been paid by Monday. [Bloomberg]

$3.5 million
Federal investigators are looking into a $3.5 million mortgage taken out by former Donald Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort. [NBC News]

$3 billion
Yahoo will buy back up to $3 billion in shares from stockholders who desperately want to finally get off the wild ride — or who wouldn’t be caught dead with a company renamed “Altaba” in their portfolios. [Reuters]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

10 percent
Ford Motor Co. plans to cut 10 percent of its global workforce, with a focus on salaried employees. The company will cut $3 billion this year. [The Wall Street Journal]

78 percent
An NBC-Wall Street Journal poll found that 78 percent of Americans would prefer that an investigation into ties between Russia and President Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign be led by an independent prosecutor or commission. [CNN]

101 years, 38 days
Age of Bryson William Verdun Hayes, who on Sunday became the oldest person to skydive. [The Guardian]

10,000 boxes
General Mills is setting up a sweepstakes where the prize is one of 10,000 boxes of marshmallow-only Lucky Charms cereal. When you think about it, this is the closest we’re gonna get to what’s essentially an extremely shabby version of “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” and based on the already ridiculous sugar content of standard Charms, it will almost certainly result in about as many human casualties. Seriously, you can just buy the marshmallows in bulk on the internet if you’re cool with your UPS guy losing all remaining respect for you. [StarTribune]

$7 million
Organizers of the notorious Fyre Festival, a failed attempt at a Bahamas music festival promoted by “influencers,” borrowed up to $7 million in a mad last-minute attempt to make good on the festival’s lofty promises and avoid becoming an international laughing stock, new documents show. It did not go great. [Bloomberg]

$9.7 billion
Twenty-nine states threaten suspension of a person’s driver’s license as a way to make them pay traffic fines. Californians owed their state $9.7 billion in traffic debt last year, and it turns out that people who can’t afford to pay are not magically transformed into people who can afford to pay the minute you take away their license to drive. [The Atlantic]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
