
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
10 years

Today is the 10th anniversary of the first YouTube video. [AP]



54 percent
Fwd.us, the techie nonprofit organization lobbying for increasing immigration of highly educated people into the U.S., raised about $37 million in its first year of operation. More than half of that —$20 million — was from Fwd.us co-founder Mark Zuckerberg, who also is the principal founder of Facebook. [The Center for Public Integrity]

664th
The ranking on Wednesday of the new music streaming app Tidal in the iPhone app store, down from 23rd last month. Jay Z’s service, which had challenges from the start, has dropped on the chart as its rivals surge toward the top. [BGR]

$25,000

The amount Floyd Mayweather paid a dentist for about 20 custom mouthguards. Mayweather will fight Manny Pacquaio next week in Las Vegas. [Grantland]


100,000

One well-known biohacker’s estimate for the number of biohackers worldwide. Biohackers seek to take control of and improve their biochemistry, their bodies and their minds, according to this well-known biohacker’s website. His estimate should be taken with a grain of salt — or pat of butter, as he takes his coffee — since he’s trying to make a bunch of money selling supplements to biohackers. But he also came up with “bulletproof coffee,” so he’s all right in my book. One night in college I tried to use a dumb party game that shocks you in order to stay awake studying, and while that was an awful idea that completely failed, that night was also when I decided to count myself in the noble club of biohackers. [Bloomberg]



3 million

The number of fake condoms seized by Shanghai police. There might have been toxic metals in them, maybe lead. Not a great situation all around. [Daily Mail]

More than 8 million
The Internal Revenue Service gets a lot of phone calls around tax time, but doesn’t have the resources to answer them all. As a result, this past tax season the agency’s phone system hung up on more than 8 million calls. [AP]

100 million

Facebook’s WhatsApp, an app that facilitates international messaging, is growing fast. The app has more than 800 million monthly active users, an increase of 100 million from four months ago. [Business Insider]

15 billion years
Throw out your Apple Watches; they can’t compete with strontium. Scientists from the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the University of Colorado, Boulder, have built an atomic clock that uses the alkaline earth metal strontium to keep time. It’s so precise, it won’t gain or lose a second for 15 billion years. Shame they came out with it a year after we realized that time is just a construct — a flat circle, really. [Los Angeles Times]


$22.98 trillion

That’s an economist’s estimate for the worth of the 1.89 billion acres of land in the continental United States. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
9

Nine people were indicted Tuesday in Kentucky after allegedly stealing more than $100,000 worth of Wild Turkey and rare Pappy Van Winkle bourbon. It is unclear to this author why they have not been charged with crimes against humanity. [The Wall Street Journal]

42 percent

Proportion of campaign contributions in 2012 that came from people who were among the wealthiest 0.01 percent of Americans, according to research published by a political action committee trying to get the 99.99 percent more involved in politics. So you know, grain, salt, etc. [Daily Kos]

74 percent




Proportion of Slovakians ages 18 to 34 who live with their parents. [The New York Times]

90 percent
Proportion of independent doughnut shops in California that are owned by people of Cambodian descent. For decades, Cambodian immigrants have joined the doughnut business after fleeing the Khmer Rouge. [Lucky Peach]

106

Number of days left until Aug. 6, 2015, Jon Stewart’s final night hosting “The Daily Show.” [The A.V. Club]

10,000 kilograms

At an expected cost of £400,000, London has successfully removed a 10,000-kilogram, 40-meter-long — ugh, screw it: At an expected cost of $600,632, London has successfully removed a 22,000-pound, 131-foot-long sewer disturbance composed of congealed fat and waste. Huzzah. [The Guardian]



$25,000

How much veteran referee Kenny Bayless will be compensated to officiate the upcoming fight between Manny Pacquiao and Floyd Mayweather. While it’s hardly chump change for a night — or more realistically, about an hour’s worth — of work, the fight itself is expected by some to pull in more than $400 million. [ESPN]



More than 88,000
Number of applicants for 55 affordable housing units in a new building west of Lincoln Center primarily slotted for luxury condos. This will presumably end with more than 87,945 applicants for pitchforks in the forthcoming revolution. [The New York Times]


95,727

A new study of 95,727 children found absolutely no relationship between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccination and the development of autism spectrum disorders. Did you hear that, California? [The Guardian]


$1.6 billion
Size of the resealable-bag market, a business with a shocking amount of intellectual property and innovation, all things considered. [Wired]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
9 batters. Or 10 batters. I say 9.

How many batters must go to the plate in a half-inning before it can be said a baseball team has “batted around?” That’s an extremely divisive question, even among the pros. John Mayberry Jr. of the Mets, Josh Satin of the AAA Louisville Bats and others — including me —  say the answer is nine. David Wright of the Mets, LaTroy Hawkins of Colorado and other mistaken people say 10. This is the kind of stupid divisive thing that starts wars, people. All I’ll say is that there’s a reason that π isn’t equal to (10*π)/9. Also, it’s pronounced “jif.” [The Wall Street Journal via @IvanTheK]

32 percent

Proportion of New Jerseyans who said they thought Gov. Chris Christie personally ordered the 2013 traffic jam at the entrance to the George Washington Bridge, according to a new poll. [Quinnipiac University Poll]

52 percent
Proportion of Americans who said in December 2014 that it was more important to “protect the right of Americans to own guns” than to “control gun ownership.” [Pew Research Center]


77

Cincinnati Reds manager Bryan Price let out a tirade directed at the media that would have made Rahm Emanuel blush. Price deftly used the word “fuck” 77 times in a menagerie of forms, while also sprinkling in 11 “shit” derivatives, all in service of his complaint that in-depth, accurate local coverage of the Reds organization has given an advantage to the competition. [Cincinnati Enquirer]


20,000 readers

Chevrolet bought video ads embedded in physical copies of Esquire and Popular Mechanics magazine. You read that correctly: There’s a video player inside the magazine pages. The specialized copies promote the Chevy Colorado, and were sent to 10,000 subscribers of each magazine whom Chevrolet had determined are likely consumers of the midsize pickup truck. Assuming this crazy experiment goes well, coverage of this form of advertising is going to go pretty quickly from the breathless tone you’re reading now to frustration with autoplaying videos embedded in comic books. [Advertising Age]

$2.3 million
The 2012 presidential campaign of President Barack Obama still owes about $2.3 million in debts. POTUS isn’t alone in this; the 2012 presidential campaign of former House Speaker Newt Gingrich owes more than $4.6 million to creditors. [Center for Public Integrity]


2,713,570 killed animals
Each year the Department of Agriculture discloses details about every single animal it killed. In fiscal year 2014, the department killed more than 2.7 million animals. They were mostly European Starlings and other birds, but the kill list included members of 319 species, or roughly a Teddy Roosevelt‘s worth, if you don’t mind the technical term. [Mother Jones]

41.8 million metric tons
Anything with a battery or power cord — like, you know, basically everything in my apartment — is, once it’s tossed, considered electronic waste. There’s a whole lot of it. Last year the planet generated 41.8 billion kilograms of e-waste, only 6.5 billion of which was recycled. [Motherboard]

$469 million

Amount users of the accommodation-booking app Airbnb contributed to the San Francisco economy in 2014, according to a new study commissioned by the accommodation-booking app Airbnb. So take it with a grain of salt is all I’m saying. [Airbnb]



$6 billion

For several weeks in 2013, Elon Musk was negotiating a potential sale of his then-struggling automaker Tesla Motors to Google. Musk’s proposed terms for the deal were that Google would pay about $6 billion, with a further $5 billion promised for factory expansions. The deal didn’t go down, but an excerpt from a forthcoming book looks back at what could have been one of the biggest tech stories of the past several years. [Bloomberg]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
12 percent
Percentage of Hawaiian homes with rooftop solar-power systems, the highest rate in the country. [The New York Times]


48 percent

The probability before the NBA playoffs began that the Golden State Warriors would win the title, based on player ratings provided to FiveThirtyEight by Jeremias Engelmann and Steve Ilardi. It was far and away the highest title-winning probability of the 16 teams that made it to the postseason. After winning their opening playoff game on Saturday, the Warriors need to win 15 more games to take the title. [FiveThirtyEight]



More than 95 percent

The federal government — along with the Innocence Project and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers — is reviewing past testimony of examiners from the FBI’s microscopic hair comparison unit. It’s not looking good. In more than 95 percent of reviewed trials, examiners overstated forensic matches in ways that strengthened prosecutors’ cases. [The Washington Post]



$500

Approximate current cost to the state of Oklahoma to execute a person via lethal injection. The state has added a backup method — carrying out death sentences with nitrogen gas — as the supply of death-row drugs begins to dry up. [The Washington Post]

$25,000 to $50,000

Price set by auction house Bonham for each of a set of pens and pencils that traveled on the Apollo 12 mission in 1969. One of the pens originally cost the U.S. government 30 cents, but hitching a ride with Alan Bean to the moon augmented its value. [Motherboard]

$400,000

Upper end of range of estimated price for an SUV that Rolls-Royce expects to start selling in 2018. High-end luxury SUVs — which companies including Mercedes-Benz and Bentley sell for more than $200,000 each — are in a relatively new auto class that appears to have staying power. [Bloomberg]

$24 million

How much “Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2” made in its opening weekend, exceeding studio expectations. I’m so disappointed in all of you who made this possible. You know who you are. [Variety]


$75 million
Amount actress Demi Moore is seeking for her penthouse in the San Remo on Central Park West in Manhattan. [The New York Times]

More than $100 million a year 
Amount the city of Los Angeles spends annually on homelessness. The vast majority of spending — as much as $87 million — is spent on patrols, arrests and interventions. The city’s homeless population grew 9 percent between 2011 and 2013. [Los Angeles Times]

103 million active users
Worldwide users of mobile money, described as “electronic value stored in an account linked to your mobile number.” [TechCrunch]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 
Happy holiday, friends. 










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
12 hours
Away messages are back! Facebook Messenger is adding the ability to set an away message for up to 12 hours. Remember, future tech titans: Imitating AOL is absolutely the route to success. [The Verge]

13 days
How long until NASA’s MESSENGER spacecraft, currently orbiting Mercury, has until it runs out of fuel and crashes into the aforementioned planet. The craft has been orbiting the Mercury since March 2011, but what will it do now that it knows the end is coming? Presumably on MESSENGER‘s bucket list is “continue orbiting Mercury” and not much else. [Discovery News]

22-9
Vote in the Tennessee State Senate to send a bill to make the Bible the official state book back to committee, effectively killing the proposal. (As if the state behind the Scopes “Monkey Trial” really needed to show the country it likes the bible.) [The Tennessean]


38 percent

Percentage of Americans who oppose the death penalty for people convicted of murder, the highest level of opposition Pew’s observed since the 1970s. [Pew Research Center]


74 “lost” seasons

When a player leaves college early to join the NBA — as seven members of the University of Kentucky basketball team elected to do earlier this year — the school loses a year of production (that’s how the colleges see it, at least). Indeed, Kentucky has “lost” more seasons than any other Division I basketball program from players going pro, with 74 player-seasons “lost” since 1999. [ACC Sports]



78 years old

Sen. Pat Roberts has “Let It Go” by Idina Menzel from the film “Frozen” as his ringtone. It interrupted a Senate hearing. The septuagenarian is enjoying absurdly high approval ratings among local lifestyle reporters. [The Washington Post]

6240-6740 MHz
That’s the frequency used by both radio telescopes — which are used to plumb the depths of space, look back into time itself and understand man’s place in this ancient dusty abyss we call a universe — and new lawn-mowing Roombas, which mow your lawn because you’re lazy and terrible. This is a problem and our species will have to pick one or the other. [Wired]

2 million


Number of high school aged Americans who smoke electronic cigarettes, according to the CDC. For some reason, people seem to think that telling a bunch of teenagers an activity is potentially dangerous will make them stop doing it, a strategy that has never worked in the history of teenagers. [Bloomberg Business] 


3.4 million

Number of people displaced though involuntary resettlement from 2004 to 2013 by World Bank projects. [The Huffington Post and ICIJ]

23 million
Estimated number of people who will take a cruise this year based on bookings data observed so far. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. P.S. Subscribe.
P.P.S. Have a good weekend.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4 nations
Countries on the U.S. list of state sponsors of terrorism — soon to be three. President Obama announced he will remove Cuba from the list, leaving only Syria, Iran and Sudan. Previous members include Iraq, Libya, North Korea and South Yemen. [NPR]

40-pound wolverine

A 40-pound wolverine being transported by staff from the Alaska State Zoo has been recaptured after it escaped from its carrier and ran loose around Newark Liberty International Airport . [The Consumerist]

Juror 49
Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court John Roberts showed up for jury duty in Montgomery County, Maryland, Wednesday. He answered some questions, but was not selected to serve on the jury (for a civil trial regarding a car crash). [The Washington Post]


91 percent decrease

The population of sardines has dropped by 91 percent since 2007, according to a conservation group in Washington State, prompting the Pacific Fishery Management Council to direct the NOAA Fisheries Service to end sardine fishing season as early as possible. [Associated Press]


330 unidentified service members
In a reversal of previous policy, the Pentagon announced it will exhume and perform DNA testing on the remains of 330 unidentified service members killed on the USS Oklahoma during the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. [Washington Post]

$2.6 million
A judge ruled on Tuesday that Shelly Sterling, the estranged wife of former Los Angeles Clippers owner Donald Sterling, is owed $2.6 million by V. Stiviano, who was given “a house, a Ferrari and other luxury gifts” by Mr. Sterling. [The Guardian]

11.6 million streams
In addition to dominating at the box office, “Furious 7” also appears to have a bona fide musical hit. “See You Again,” by Wiz Khalifa (featuring Charlie Puth) is the No. 1 song on Spotify. That and other songs from the film’s soundtrack have accumulated 11.6 million streams across various services in the past week. [The New York Times]

$49.5 million

Combined amount Chipotle paid its two co-CEOs last year, a total that has made some shareholders in the fast-casual burrito joint — preferred by 1-in-4 declared presidential candidates! — unhappy. [New York Times Dealbook]

$56.5 million

Cost of launching a Falcon 9 rocket, according SpaceX (assuming the rocket is not recovered after launch). The company said the cost would only be about $5 million to $7 million should the rocket be recovered, as they’re working on doing. On Tuesday, SpaceX tried to land a spent rocket on a barge in the Atlantic Ocean, and while the rocket did hit the barge, it also exploded — meaning it can’t be re-used. [Bloomberg TV]



62 million

Number of Netflix subscribers worldwide, according to earnings announced Wednesday. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. P.S. Subscribe.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
Less than 1 gram

The FDA sent a letter to the maker of Kind bars saying they have too much saturated fat to be advertised as healthy. The FDA’s standard for a serving of food is less than one gram. [Bloomberg]


38 percent

That’s the percentage of Republicans who think their party is “good” or “excellent” at choosing candidates to run for office, compared to 51 percent of Democrats, according to a new poll from YouGov and the Huffington Post. [The Huffington Post]

53 percent

Percentage of Americans who favor the legal use of marijuana, according to a new Pew survey. [Pew Research Center]



62 percent

North Korea bills itself as a collectivist state, but the country has plenty of black and grey markets. A survey of North Korean defectors found 62 percent reported working outside their official occupations. “Private trade has become so prevalent in recent years that it permeates all levels of society, from the poorest through to the Communist Party and military elites.” [Reuters]



$100

Cost of the new “Guitar Hero Live” from Activision, which includes a redesigned guitar controller that adds $40 to the customary $60 price of a console game. This means that old guitar peripheral collecting dust behind the Blu-Ray player is worthless, so for the love of god can we finally throw that thing out, John. [Business Insider]



630 feet
Construction began Tuesday in Staten Island on a 630 foot high ferris wheel. The attraction will potentially be the tallest ferris wheel in the world — assuming that a construction project in New York City manages to stay on schedule, and unless Dubai completes a planned 690 foot wheel first. [Mashable]

71 million miles
The New Horizons spacecraft took a color photograph of ex-planet Pluto and its biggest moon, Charon, from a mere 71 million miles away. The craft is scheduled to arrive at the dwarf planet in July. [CNET]

$185 million

That’s the budget for the “Angry Birds” movie, doomed to be released next year. Marketing for the film will presumably be handled by that persistent person from High School you did not realize you were still friends with on Facebook. [The AV Club]

$505.9 million
Amount the NCAA distributed to the teams and conferences that played in college football’s 39 Division I bowl games. [The Associated Press]

$960 million

One estimate for how much money will be spent during the 2016 election on online advertisements, up from $270 million during the 2012 election. [Reuters]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Also, be sure to pay your taxes. 
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. P.S. Subscribe.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe. 
0.00055 percent
The probability the asteroid 2012 TC4 — which is about the size of a house — hits the earth in October 2017. “Defund NASA,” they said. “Why spend the money on more telescopes,” they said. [Phys.org]

11.9 percent


Percentage of Americans who don’t have health insurance, according to a new Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index survey of a whopping 43,575 adults. That’s the lowest uninsured rate Gallup has found since the survey began in 2008. [Gallup]



15 percent

Percentage of NFL players drafted between 1996 and 2003 who went bankrupt within 12 years of retiring, according to a new National Bureau of Economic Research working paper. [Quartz]

35 percent

Percentage of “challenges” to library books that were brought by concerned parents, according to an annual report from the American Library Association. According to the report: “Authors of color and books with diverse content are disproportionately challenged and banned.” [Smithsonian Magazine]

75 miles per hour
The expected top speed of a train on a route China is considering building through a tunnel beneath Mt. Everest, a regional tourist trap and curiosity. [The Guardian]

$673

Average amount a U.S. wedding guest will spend in 2015, up 14 percent over last year. The money is mostly spent on airfare, food, hotels and clothes. It’s times like these I wish my friends followed my example of simply sabotaging relationships the minute things get even a little bit serious. [MarketWatch]

$70,000
That’s the new minimum annual salary at Gravity Payments, a credit card processing company, to be phased in over the next three years. We’re definitely in a tech bubble, right? [The New York Times]

957,000 preorders

That’s the estimate of how many Apple Watches were preordered on the first day the trinkets were made available for sale. [9to5mac]

16 billion messages
Yahoo! Labs undertook what’s being billed as the largest email study ever, looking at the emails of 2 million participants who got 16 billion messages, analyzing the number of recipients, the email’s word count and the age of the sender and receiver (among other things). The short of it? The older you are, the longer your emails tend to be. [Popular Science]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. Also, subscribe.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe. Seriously, clicking on things in order to read them? Yawn. Subscribe.
3 hours

A robot sent into one of the reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant lasted for three hours, inspecting about two-thirds of what it was supposed to before dying. [Sputnik News]

4 “Game of Thrones” episodes

Season 5 of HBO’s “Game of Thrones” premiered Sunday night, but not before the first four episodes of the season leaked online and were downloaded hundreds of thousands of times. [TorrentFreak]

28 Ebola patients
The U.S. has spent many millions of dollars building Ebola treatment centers in Liberia that haven’t been used; 11 U.S.-built centers have seen 28 patients. [New York Times]

46 banks

The head of the Ukrainian Deposit Insurance Fund said 46 Ukrainian banks have gone bankrupt. The nation’s economy shrank 7.5 percent last year. [Press TV]

54 charged officers
Despite thousands of shootings by police officers since 2005, only 54 officers were ever charged with a crime. [Washington Post]

100 miles per hour
That’s the speed limit the FAA set for Amazon’s delivery drones, which are currently in the testing phase. [Gizmodo]


$1,000 per unit

IKEA is planning to mass produce temporary housing units for use in refugee camps and disaster areas. The shelters each cost $1,000 to make and come with all the tools needed for assembly. [Web Urbanist]



$15,000
That’s the amount of benefits welfare recipients in Australia could lose if they don’t vaccinate their children. The Australian government announced the new “no jab, no pay” policy Sunday. [Sky News]

More than $2 billion
One of the downsides of an actively managed pension fund? Fees. New York City’s pension funds have paid more than $2 billion in management fees over the last 10 years for “virtually nothing in return.” [New York Times]


$2.5 billion
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has formally entered the 2016 presidential race. Her supporters and Super PACs are looking to raise $2.5 billion. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. Also, subscribe.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe. Seriously, clicking on things in order to read them? Yawn. Subscribe.
7 players
Seven University of Kentucky players declared themselves eligible for the 2015 NBA draft. [Cincinnati.com]


20 minutes
New York City mayor Bill De Blasio took the subway to work, riding an R train for 20 minutes to promote a push for transit money. The mayor was joined by Sen. Chuck Schumer, who presumably was just tagging along since he technically works in Washington, D.C., a quaint Amtrak stopover and tourist attraction located somewhere south of Philadelphia. [The New York Times via Gothamist]

92.1 percent

Percentage of software developers who are men, according to Stack Overflow’s 2015 developer’s survey. [Fusion]

$429

Cost of a roundtrip flight to Cuba from Orlando International, flying Island Travel & Tours, which will offer service starting in July. [Orlando Sentinel]



500 pot shops

Two years ago, residents of Los Angeles voted to cap the number of stores allowed to sell cannabis at 130. Clearly the free market was not alerted of this limitation: The city announced on Thursday it had closed 500 medical marijuana dispensaries. [Reuters]

1,000-foot water slide
Detroit is getting a temporary water slide, which I guess is what passes for an infrastructure improvement these days. A single ride goes for $15, unlimited pass for $50. [Curbed]


20,000
That’s a very nice, clean, round number, right? The Nikkei, Japan’s stock exchange, briefly broke this nice, clean, round number on Thursday, but promptly dipped below the nice, clean, round number. This type of financial news happens whenever a financial thing becomes a multiple of a power of ten. [Bloomberg Business]

$76,000
For the first time in a long time, former Rep. Aaron Schock will have to pick up a check. Marshall County, Illinois, is charging the disgraced former congressman — who resigned after allegations he pocketed reimbursements for mileage he didn’t drive — for the costs of the special election to replace him. [Peoria Journal Star]

$25 million
AT&T call center employees sold customer information to outside parties on at least 3 occasions — leaking the information of as many as 279,000 customers. The telecom giant will now pay a $25 million fine. [The Washington Post]

$91,541,053

Hedge fund zillionaire Bill Ackman flipped a 13,500-square-foot penthouse apartment at One57, an enviable Manhattan address, for $91.5 million, the city’s second-highest condo sale ever. In related news, a local lifestyle reporter had an hour-and-a-half commute home to Jersey City’s Heights district due to Lincoln Tunnel traffic, and local reports indicate that yeah, screw it, Hot Pockets don’t really go bad, right? [6sqft]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. Also, subscribe.







