
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
43 percent
On Monday night, Dallas defeated Washington in a game that started with 58 minutes of boring and ended with a two-minute display of great and terrible football. Still, this means we need to talk about the NFC East, a wide-open division where every team has a losing record. It could produce a 6-10 playoff team. The Cowboys are 4-8, while Philadelphia, Washington and the Giants are each 5-7. One of these teams, in four weeks, will advance to the playoffs. FiveThirtyEight’s NFL Elo model currently gives Philly a 43 percent chance of going to the postseason, New York a 28 percent chance, Washington a 19 percent chance and Dallas a 10 percent chance. As a Giants fan, I’ll take those odds, but this division is the football equivalent of a cigarette butt somehow still smoldering in a puddle of horse pee on 59th Street on a humid New York day. [FiveThirtyEight]

45 percent
The El Niño cycle has all sorts of effects on agriculture, but its impact on one crop in particular may hit America’s insatiable sweet tooth by next year. Sugar prices are up 45 percent since August as droughts in India and Thailand and rain in Brazil ravage the supply. Demand for sugar is soon expected to exceed supply, so make like those kids from “Heavy Weights” and assemble your stockpile now, America. [Bloomberg]

49 percent
Percentage of Republicans who oppose a religious test for Syrian refugees to come to the U.S., according to a Fox News poll. On Monday, Donald Trump floated the idea of banning all Muslims from entering the U.S., which is probably unconstitutional, definitely extreme, and honestly just kind of terrifying coming from the leading candidate from a major American political party. [FiveThirtyEight]

57 percent
Percentage of Republican caucus-goers in Iowa who identified as born-again or evangelical Christians in 2012. This group has a complex relationship with the Republican Party, to say the least, but one potential bit of good news for the mainstream GOP is that they could serve as a willing firewall against an early Trump win in Iowa. [FiveThirtyEight]

$232
That’s the average American’s yearly legal expenses. Given how much legal services typically cost, Americans don’t really fight the small stuff: Only 5 percent of traffic tickets go to court, for example. A suite of legal apps are out to change that. [Bloomberg]

253
That’s where the Beijing municipal air-quality index stood on Monday. Anything over 200 is considered “very unhealthy” in the U.S., and Beijing has issued its first-ever air quality red alert, meaning schools are closed, car travel is restricted and barbecuing is banned. [The New York Times]

$500 per day
An Ohio couple has built a zombie-themed Nativity scene for the second year in a row, and some of their neighbors are not happy. The couple has been threatened with a fine of $500 per day by local zoning officials if they keep it up, but so far they haven’t heard anything since the deadline. Honestly, knowing how that whole saga ends, if you ask me, this isn’t blasphemy so much as heavy-handed foreshadowing. [The New York Times]

12,500 seats
Brazil’s problems getting ready to host the 2016 Summer Olympics continue: Because of a last-minute construction change, the Olympics Aquatic Stadium will have to shed 1,250 seats, dropping its capacity to 12,500 people. The stadium’s construction is already about $2.8 million over its budget, and losing the seats will cost about the same amount in lost ticket revenue. [SwimSwam]

15,000 tons
The U.S. Navy’s largest destroyer ever launched for sea trials on Monday. The USS Zumwalt is 600 feet long, weighs 15,000 tons, and cost a cool $4.4 billion. There were originally 32 ships planned in the Zumwalt’s class, but only three will be built thanks to cost overruns and a change in plans. Still, the story about the launch reports that the ship’s skipper is named Capt. James Kirk, so I assume the USS Zumwalt will explore strange new worlds, seek out new life and new civilizations, boldly go where no man has gone before. [The Associated Press]

1.4 million people
Food deserts — areas without supermarkets where fresh, healthy food is scarce — were a major target of first lady Michelle Obama’s nutrition initiatives. Still, in the past four years, only 1.4 million of the 18 million people living in a food desert got a new supermarket. [The Associated Press]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0 cancer
Yeah, I’m kind of stretching the concept of a digit here, but former U.S. president Jimmy Carter is cancer free. Carter, who announced in August that he had four melanoma lesions on his brain, said Sunday that those were gone and that there were no signs of new ones. [Atlanta Journal-Constitution]

1.5 extra years
Having a bunch of books in your home can be huge for kids: A study of 15-year-olds in 42 countries found that — outside of gross national product — the number of books in a home was the best predictor of reading proficiency. “The greatest effect was seen in libraries of about 100 books, which resulted in approximately 1.5 extra years of grade-level reading performance.” [The New York Times]

12-0
The Carolina Panthers beat the New Orleans Saints on Sunday, making the Panthers 12-0 and the first team in the league to clinch a playoff bid. In other good news, the Pats lost. In bad news, it was Philadelphia who beat them. [ESPN]

13 months
The U.S. Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division will reportedly investigate the Chicago Police Department and the killing of 17-year-old Laquan McDonald. It took 13 months, and a judge’s order, before video of the killing was released. [The Chicago Sun-Times]

52.3 percent
The Kepler telescope has been trawling the skies for planets that exist outside our own solar system, but a new survey of the data found that about 52 percent of the identified planets may have been false positives. [Science World Report]

78 percent
Probability that a straight woman’s first marriage will last at least 20 years, provided she has a bachelor’s degree. Compare that with a 40 percent probability for women who have finished only high school, or less. [Pew Research Center]

99 percent
The Cavendish banana constitutes about 99 percent of the global banana market, but it wasn’t always so. The Cavendish replaced the Gros Michel, which was wiped out by a disease about 50 years. Now, it’s happening again, with planters powerless to stem Tropical Race 4, a powerful and deadly disease killing Cavendish populations worldwide. Too carby anyway if you ask me. [The Washington Post]

1,367 men
Number of men who suffered a genital injury from 2001 through 2013 as part of military service in Iraq and Afghanistan. Within a year, surgeons at Johns Hopkins University will attempt the first penis transplant in the U.S. on one such wounded soldier. [The New York Times]

$7,917.15
A Freedom of Information Act request from student journalist Chris Robbins in Michigan — asking which websites were blocked on his school’s computers — resulted in a fee of $7,917.15. After Robbins appealed the price, the school district responded with a bill of $8,806. The student later submitted a simpler request. [The Detroit News]

$100,000
MIT researchers have hacked the Microsoft Kinect to do fluorescence lifetime imaging, a medical technique “that could be useful for cancer diagnosis and DNA sequencing.” Your basic Kinect sells for about $100. The standard imaging device usually goes for $100,000. [Fast Company]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0.12
An attorney who wrote a book called “The Drinker’s Guide to Driving: The Secrets of DUI from One of America’s Top DUI Lawyers” was arrested for drunk driving Sunday, with a blood alcohol level of 0.12. Yes, it did happen in Florida — excellent guess. [The Herald Tribune]

2nd-longest
After his team trailed all night against the Detroit Lions, Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers threw a 61-yard game-ending Hail Mary pass for a touchdown with no time on the clock. The pass was the second-longest come-from-behind game-ending touchdown ever, and from a distance where such passes have a terrible completion rate. It was the worst thing to happen to the city of Detroit since globalization and systemic mismanagement. [ESPN Stats & Info, Brian Burke]

20:24
Elvira Montes, an 81-year-old grandmother, was the oldest finisher in this year’s Beer Mile World Championships, finishing four beers and running 1 mile in 20 minutes, 24 seconds. She is what we in the business call a “role model.” We should all be so lucky reach age 81, let alone sustain a reliable competitive drinking habit. [Runner’s World]

44.9 percent
Percentage of U.S. adults who worked for an employer at least 30 hours per week in November, as measured by Gallup’s Good Jobs rate. [Gallup]

92 counts
The other shoe has dropped, people, and it is feigning catastrophic injury in order to procure a yellow card as we speak. U.S. prosecutors announced a 92-count indictment against 16 FIFA officials yesterday, following up on a raid of a Swiss hotel where several officials were staying. [CNN] 

95.7 degrees Fahrenheit
A spokesperson for the upcoming Olympic Games said that organizers did not consider it critical to pay for air conditioning in athletes’ quarters in Rio de Janeiro and that someone else will have to handle the costs. Keep in mind that this year, Aug. 19, which would be towards the end of the events this coming year, hit 95.7 degrees in Rio. [ESPN]

589 reporters
In 2014, the number of reporters from niche outlets accredited by the U.S. Senate press gallery exceeded the number of reporters from daily newspapers. As someone from a niche outlet, I guess this is cool? Go niche outlets! [Pew Research Center]

220,000 jobs
Ashton Carter, whose name makes him sound like he is a member of One Direction but who is actually America’s secretary of defense, announced yesterday that the U.S. military will open all combat jobs to women. About 220,000 such jobs within the armed forces had been closed to women. [The Washington Post]

$5 million
That’s the amount brilliant negotiator and world-renowned dealmaker Donald Trump wanted CNN to donate to charity to ensure his participation in an upcoming presidential debate. CNN declined, but the legendary businessman and genius arbitrator, who as we all know could strike an absolutely flawless deal with anyone, especially the Chinese, relented and decided to participate in the debate anyway, because the negotiating strategy of “giving up when your primary request isn’t met” is just a tactic from page one of “The Art of the Deal,” a book Trump definitely wrote all by himself. [The Washington Post]

$117 million
Amount raised on Giving Tuesday, another manufactured holiday trying to chew the crumbs left over by the capitalist orgy that is Black Friday, albeit for charity. This is frankly encouraging, because I personally had a lot of trouble getting into the Small Business Saturday spirit this year. [NBC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 new member
NATO announced Wednesday it will invite Montenegro, a nation of roughly 600,000, to join its ranks, a move that’s delighting Montenegrins, infuriating Russians, and confusing Americans who are just learning that there is a country called Montenegro. Welcome to NATO, Montenegro, we hope you enjoy the North Atlantic trade. [The New York Times]

12+
The story is developing this morning, but there was another raid on FIFA officials who were staying in a Swiss hotel! Authorities anticipate more than a dozen people connected to international soccer’s governing body will be charged with corruption-related crimes. [The New York Times]

15-minute drive
Kevin Wells, an English photographer, gave Public Enemy’s Flavor Flav, Chuck D and others a crucial lift to a gig in Sheffield in his Ford Focus when the rappers’ cab left without them. The 15-minute drive not only got the band to the venue in time but also produced probably the end-all dinner party story for Wells. [NPR]

32 percent
A study published in the journal Acta Neuropathologica found evidence of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or CTE, in 32 percent of men who had participated in contact sports in their youth. In the control group, no one had signs of the disease. [Yahoo News]

55.5 percent
Response rate to a labor force survey in the U.K., down from 76.5 percent in 2003. As a guy who pays his rent by doing stuff with numbers, I really can’t emphasize enough how crucial it is that people tell pollsters what they think. If you don’t, we won’t get a reliable picture of society — a concern U.K. statisticians are trying to get out in the open. [The Wall Street Journal]

60 percent
Hillary Clinton expanded her lead over Sen. Bernie Sanders in a new Quinnipiac poll released Wednesday, taking 60 percent of Democratic support to Sanders’s 30 percent, compared to a 53/35 breakdown in early November. [Quinnipiac]

351 mass shootings
According to the crowdsourced Mass Shootings Tracker project, that’s how many U.S. incidents where four or more people were injured or killed in a shooting this year as of Nov. 27. That’s up from 2014, and up since last week following a shooting Wednesday in San Bernardino, California, that left at least 14 people dead. [FiveThirtyEight]

1,000 convictions
According to leaked documents, since the 1990s police officers in Alabama related to a neo-confederate group have been planting drugs on black men. About 1,000 wrongful convictions have resulted, according to the documents from the Alabama Justice Project. [Henry County Report via The Week]

1,100 dinosaurs
A museum 300 miles away from Beijing has amassed the world’s largest dinosaur collection, a noble goal if there ever was one. The Tianyu Museum of Nature has about 1,100 dinosaur fossils, which are the next-coolest thing to actual dinosaurs, which are the coolest thing. [The New York Times]

185,345 background checks
People went out to buy lots and lots of guns on Black Friday. The FBI reported running 185,345 background checks for gun sales on the Friday after Thanksgiving. I would normally make a reference to “A Christmas Story” here, but I’m kind of emotionally exhausted from two mass shooting in six days, so I’ll sit it out. [The Associated Press]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 teaspoon
New York City became the first city in the country to mandate that chain restaurants label dishes that contain more than one teaspoon of salt, the recommended daily allowance. Given that I learned the difference between a teaspoon and a tablespoon only a few months ago (weird batch of brownies, for more than one reason) today, for the very first time, I am now in favor of the metric system, because the equivalent 2.3 grams of salt is something I can wrap my head around. [The Telegraph]

5 minutes, 31 seconds, 22 frames
Have you watched the trailers for “Star Wars: The Force Awakens”? If all the footage in those trailers actually appears in the film, fans have seen just more than 5 minutes, 31 seconds of the movie, or roughly 4 percent should the advertised 2 hour, 16 minute run time hold. [Eleven-ThirtyEight]
Full disclosure: Disney owns Star Wars and also owns ESPN, ESPN owns FiveThirtyEight, FiveThirtyEight pays Walter, I am Walter.

5.7 percent
The future of polling comes down to one man: Donald Trump. I mean, kind of. The level of support for Trump in live-interview polls — the kind we’ve relied on for decades — is averaging 23.4 percent, while the support for Trump in online polls — arguably the future of the field, provided those who run them can match the accuracy of their landline predecessors — is at 29.1 percent. That’s a 5.7-point difference, which is a pretty big deal. When we get a chance to see how these different methodologies play out, depending on Trump’s actual degree of support, we could get a good look at the future of polling. [FiveThirtyEight]

16 measures
Number of abortion and family planning measures John Kasich has signed since becoming governor of Ohio in 2011. Abortions in Ohio have fallen 25 percent during his tenure. While he hasn’t yet bragged about it on the campaign trail, Kasich has one of the most demonstrable anti-abortion records of anyone in the GOP field. [FiveThirtyEight]

10.3 percent
Percentage of U.S. women who used an IUD in 2012, up from 2 percent in 2002. Intra-uterine devices, which prevent pregnancy, are the new focus of a legal campaign against the Affordable Care Act from from anti-abortion groups, which argue that in rare cases IUDs could prevent the implantation of a fertilized egg. [Reuters]

19 percent
Estimated percentage of donors to the 2003 gubernatorial campaign of now-Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, an Indian-American, who were South Asian-Americans. That number declined over the course of Jindal’s subsequent campaigns. In his recently ended national bid for the presidency, Jindal presented a particularly notable case where, after a certain point, minority candidates fail to garner support among fellow minorities. [FiveThirtyEight]

42 percent
People might be naming their offspring after Instagram filters. “Ludwig” as a name was up 42 percent last year according to BabyCenter, a parenting website, while “Juno” was up 30 percent and “Amaro” was up 26 percent. All right, all of a sudden I understand what that friend with the kid named Lo-fi Jenkins was going for. [Re/code]

51 turtles
A man who attempted to cross the border to Canada with 51 turtles taped to his body pleaded guilty to smuggling charges. Let he among us who hasn’t been there throw the first stone. [Associated Press]

4,200 hours
Photographer Alan McFadyen spent 4,200 hours — roughly 175 full days — over six years trying to get the perfect picture of a kingfisher diving for a fish just as its pointy beak broke the water. Needless to say, he totally nailed it. [Geekologie]

1.8 billion streams
Drake was the most-streamed artist of 2015 on Spotify, according to the company, with 1.8 billion streams. This was a good year for Canadian musicians, as Justin Bieber took the record for the most streams in a single day, with 36 million on Nov. 13. [Spotify News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0 times
The Third Amendment to the Constitution — the one that bans the quartering of soldiers in homes without the owner’s consent — is sort of the Pete Best of the early American legislative experiment. While the other amendments have had all sorts of play at the highest levels of legal rulings, there has never been a Supreme Court decision primarily based on the Third Amendment. Clearly the Founders had a goal, wrote it down, and we haven’t had too many questions about the matter since. Nice work, Founders. Anyway, there’s an idea bubbling among legal theorists to use the Third Amendment to counteract domestic spying from the NSA — a branch of the Department of Defense — and while it may not be 100 percent there, it’s interesting. [Ars Technica]

7 counts
Former New York Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, who was accused of receiving $4 million in kickbacks, was found guilty on all seven counts against him Monday, including four counts of fraud, two counts of extortion and one count of money laundering. [DNAinfo]

12th-best team
The Carolina Panthers are doing really, really well this year, with an undefeated record of 11-0. But they are — based on FiveThirtyEight’s NFL Elo model — in 12th place in a ranking of the 12 teams to ever go 11-0. Essentially this means what Panthers followers already know: Early in the season, the team won several close games. But hey, the top 11-0 team ever was the 2007 New England Patriots, and we all remember how that went down.1 [FiveThirtyEight]

15 years
George Lucas, the creator of Star Wars and now a private citizen who has not been allowed anywhere near the new Star Wars movie, has not used the Internet in the past 15 years. I wonder what online Menace could have possibly appeared in the year 2000 to drive him offline. [The Washington Post]
Full disclosure: Disney owns Star Wars and also owns ESPN, ESPN owns FiveThirtyEight, FiveThirtyEight pays Walter, I am Walter. I also like Star Wars a lot, but on my own time. 

$35
AT&T subscribers who have managed to hold on tightly to their grandfathered $30-per-month unlimited data plans will see a $5 price increase in February. [9to5Mac]

63 percent
New York tweaked its statewide Algebra I exam to make it harder to pass. Well guess what, it’s totally working. Only 63 percent of students passed the exam this year, compared to 72 percent last year. [The New York Times]

65 percent
A survey by the Society for Human Resource Management (which sounds like a shadowy pseudo-governmental agency that tries to kill James Bond but really just works with HR people) found only 65 percent of surveyed companies will have a holiday party for employees this year, down from 83 percent in the halcyon days of 1998. [Bloomberg]

600,000 elevators
The world’s biggest elevator market is in China, but as the rate of people moving to its big cities slows and a glut of existing housing remains, demand for elevators is expected to drop. Otis Elevator, the biggest manufacturer of elevators in the world, estimated that Chinese sales will decrease from the 600,000 units sold last year to about 500,000 next year. [Bloomberg]

18 million
While the final numbers won’t be out until next year, Wall Street analysts are estimating 18 million new vehicles sold in the U.S. in 2015, the most ever. The current record-holder is 2000, when 17.6 million vehicles were sold. [Business Insider]

33 million
Estimate of the number of visitors to Rome for the upcoming Jubilee of Mercy, a nearly yearlong Roman Catholic event, up from the city’s annual average of 13 million visitors. To protect these tourists, Rome has banned the people dressed as Roman Centurions who hang around the city posing for pictures or pulling rickshaws. The city believes the historical interpreters are a nuisance. This is worse than the time Colonial Williamsburg removed a historical hemp farmer interpreter, though in retrospect he may have just been a guy trying to sell weed to William & Mary students. [Smithsonian Magazine]

Exciting news! For the next two weeks, as global powers meet in Paris to negotiate responses to climate change, we’ll be publishing a climate-focused Significant Digits offshoot, written by the hella rad Christie Aschwanden. Check out the first edition.
And if you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 team
With New England’s loss to Denver 30-24 in overtime Sunday, the Carolina Panthers are the NFL’s only remaining undefeated team following (most of) Week 12. We still give the Patriots the highest chance of winning the Super Bowl. [ESPN]

20 seasons
Los Angeles Lakers shooting guard Kobe Bryant announced — in a poem! — that this NBA season, his 20th, will be his last. Bryant has been injured often recently, playing in just 41 of 164 games the last two seasons. [The New York Times]

32 countries
Japan is trying to figure out how to handle a population that is increasingly elderly, with a huge bearing on the rest of the world: By 2050, 32 countries will have a population with a greater share of senior citizens than Japan does today, according to the United Nations. [The Wall Street Journal]

41 percent
The probability Oklahoma will win college football’s national title, according to FiveThirtyEight’s model. The Sooners won the Big 12 championship over weekend. [FiveThirtyEight]

$100,000
Estimate for how much the department store Kohl’s will pay to use a cover of the Beatles song “All Together Now” in a national ad campaign of 15- to 30-second spots. The band’s iconic oeuvre is far from cheap, and securing song rights can take months of negotiation. But by using a cover artist for the song instead of the original recording, the advertising firm Kohl’s hired was able to roughly halve the cost. [The New York Times]

200,000 views
A convicted Czech pirate — to be more specific here, the kind of pirate who uploads movies or software he isn’t supposed to, not the kind of pirate who attacks boats and pillages — got software firms to agree not to sue him if he made an anti-piracy video and got 200,000 views for it within two months. The man succeeded in this endeavor, with more than 400,000 views so far, and now does not have to pay a lot of money to very angry multinational corporations. [BBC]

3.38 million
U.S. opening week sales for Adele’s new album, “25,” the first to sell more than 3 million copies in a week in Nielsen’s history of monitoring sales. [Billboard]

4.8 million
A breach has compromised 4.8 million records of Hong Kong-based toy company VTech, potentially exposing customer account data to hackers. User passwords were encrypted using a crappy MD5 hash, and what’s worse, hackers can use the data to easily make connections between accounts for parents and their children. It all sounds like catnip for a fear-mongering local news broadcast near you. [Troy Hunt via Ars Technica]

$20 billion
Climate change talks begin in Paris today, with some early news bolstering confidence in a potential agreement: The U.S. and 18 other countries will double investment in clean energy to $20 billion, according to the White House. The measure has the support of technology and business leaders as well. [The Guardian]

??? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ ???
We’re going for an unconventional digit today. Here is typically where we’d discuss the sales numbers coming out of Black Friday, and how [good/bad] they are and the [exciting/deleterious] effect that might have on holiday spending, which in turn could have an [unspeakable/Lovecraftian] impact on overall consumer spending. But my colleague Ben Casselman set me straight: All the numbers you’re reading about Black Friday sales are unreliable and often useless. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading a very special Thanksgiving edition of Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1.2 times as high
Increase in foot traffic in department stores on Black Friday, according to a Google analysis of its users’ location history from Nov. 1 though Dec. 25 last year. Electronics stores see a massive jump on the national day of commercialism, with 2.3 times as many people passing through. [Think With Google]

4 years
Amount of time it took for Thanksgiving to no longer be a holiday for retail workers. In 2011, it was considered absurd when stores like Target, Macy’s, Best Buy, and Kohl’s tried out “Black Midnight,” opening their doors right after Thanksgiving ended. Now it’s rare to find major retailers that aren’t open with deals on Thanksgiving proper. [BuzzFeed]

7 minutes
Flying to Thanksgiving dinner this year? If you’re flying on Spirit, you can expect an average of nine minutes added to the flight relative to other airlines, while if you’re on Virgin your flight is typically seven minutes faster than other airlines. [FiveThirtyEight]

11 percent
Support among Republicans for an executive action issued by President Obama pardoning two turkeys last Thanksgiving, rather than the usual one. 38 percent of GOP respondents to the Public Policy Polling survey opposed the choice. In fairness, that turkey did all those murders and swore he’d kill again, so the argument for the additional pardon is understandably fraught. [PPP Polls]

20 percent
Percentage of respondents to a survey about Thanksgiving dinner who said they had mac and cheese on the table. But that’s not consistent across the country. Thanksgiving sides are regionally specific: About 35 percent of Southerners who took the survey said they’d have macaroni and cheese on the meal, with similar disproportionate preferences for squash in New England, cornbread in the central south, and, believe it or not, salad on the west coast. [FiveThirtyEight]

$50.11
According to the American Farm Bureau Federation, that’s the average cost of a Thanksgiving dinner for 10 in the year 2015, up 70 cents from 2014. [Las Vegas Review Journal]

83 percent
As for the football on Thanksgiving, the FiveThirtyEight model says the Detroit Lions and Philadelphia Eagles game is a coin flip — the Lions have a win probability of 52 percent. As the day goes on, the pre-game probabilities get a little more lopsided: Carolina is forecasted to beat Dallas 65 percent of the time, and Green Bay should beat Chicago 83 percent of the time. [FiveThirtyEight]

$805
Forecast of the average per-shopper holiday spending this year, according to the National Retail Federation. It forecasts $630.5 billion to be spent this year, up 3.7 percent from 2014. Still, this doesn’t mean that Black Friday rules anymore: consumer spending, once isolated on the day after Thanksgiving, has become more distributed. [The Dallas Morning News]

10,000 calls
On Thanksgiving day last year the Butterball turkey prep hotline fielded more than 10,000 calls. [The Guardian]

Over 6 million
Estimated population of North American wild turkeys, up from a low of somewhere between 30,000 to 200,000 at the lowest level in the 1920s and 1930s. [New Scientist]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
We’re off for the holiday — talk to you Monday!
