
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

1 year
A team of six NASA astronauts began a one-year isolation project in Hawaii to simulate a year on Mars without fresh air or privacy. I really hope Fox options this for a terrible reality show. [BBC]

3 times as likely

A new study found that British teenagers who identified with the Goth subculture at age 15 were three times as likely to be clinically depressed in their teen years as those who did not. [The Guardian]


4 months
An Australian man was released from a months-long detention after a substance in his possession originally believed to be methamphetamine turned out to just be Epsom salts. He was in the clink for four months before police finally got around to making sure the rocks were meth. If I were him, I would be so mad at the guy who sold me that “meth.” [The Independent]

72.2 percent

Percentage of pop stars — a set of the 50 top-selling artists of each decade — from 1950 to 2014 who were born in the United States. The U.K. comes in at a far second, with 15.6 percent of the stars in the set. [CityLab]


118 years

President Obama approved an order from the Secretary of the Interior to rename the peak known as Mount McKinley for the last 118 years to its original Alaskan appellation, Denali. This has been an Alaska vs. Ohio fight for some time: the former — where the mountain is in fact located — has long fought to call the peak by its Koyukon Athabascan name, while the latter, where President William McKinley was born, has sought to nix the change. Obama — a guy who presumably gets non-contiguous states, being from Hawaii — finally approved the change. Also, Speaker John Boehner is ticked. [Alaska Dispatch News]

11,000 years
A wooden statue found in the peat bogs of Russia 125 years ago has just been dated to 11,000 years old, making it the oldest wooden artifact in the world. It’s covered in an encrypted code nobody can decipher, but scholars seem to think it contains the outlines of a belief system. [Yahoo News]

$108,000
About 850 vintage Atari games found in a landfill in New Mexico have sold for a total of $108,000 on eBay. The city of Alamogordo will get most of the funds, with $16,000 going to the local historical society. [CTV News]

$500,000
How much Major League Baseball paid for the domain MLB.com in 2000, in addition to six months of free advertising for the domain’s original owners, Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP. It’s been a steady fight in the following 15 years to nail down domain names for each of the league’s 30 franchises, and only three preferred domains remain out of MLB’s grasp: Giants.com, which is owned by the New York football team, Rays.com, owned by a Seattle restaurant, and Twins.com, which is a whole other story involving a pair of legitimate twins who refuse to sell. [Grantland]

$1.8 million
“We Are Your Friends,” a movie about electronic dance music starring Zac Efron, had one of the worst wide-release openings ever, earning only $1.8 million from 2,333 screens this past weekend. [Variety]


5.5 billion barrels

A huge natural gas field has been found off the coast of Egypt by an Italian energy group. It’s got up to 30 trillion cubic feet of gas, about the same as 5.5 billion barrels of oil. [BBC]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

1 voter
Gerrymandering can backfire, moneyed elites: A redistricting plan accidentally left a single University of Missouri student as the sole registered voter in a community improvement district in Columbia, Missouri. By herself, Jen Henderson, age 23, gets to vote on a sales tax increase for her area. [Columbia Daily Tribune]


2.45 percent
What a week! The Nasdaq Composite gained 2.45 percent Thursday, rebounding from a tumultuous couple of days when the market appeared to be in a correction. Aren’t you glad you listened to Ben Casselman? [CNBC]

20 percent

Percentage of Americans who talk about their religion online in a typical week. [Pew Research Center]


41 percent
According to a survey of 20,000 U.S. service-members, 41 percent of women in the military have suffered sexual harassment. About 4 percent of men surveyed also reported they had been sexually harassed. [Reuters]

71 percent
A Billboard survey of music executives found that 71 percent of respondents thought the music streaming service Tidal would survive for one more year or less. This isn’t very encouraging for the Jay-Z helmed app. Then again, if there’s a group on the planet to trust less about technology than music industry executives, I’d love to meet them and introduce them to fire, rounded stones and pointed sticks. [Billboard]

103 points
Consumer Reports is typically a no-nonsense evaluator of products. But that fact made the magazine’s initial score for the Tesla Model S P85D, 103 out of a possible 100, raise some eyebrows. The test is broken! Consumer Reports eventually had to tweak their model, but does this mean the blender I bought that I thought scored a 65 actually did worse? [Forbes]

152 socks

Current record for number of socks worn on one foot. That seems like a dubious mark to enshrine. Nonetheless, Guinness wants to record it, and more importantly, someone was possessed to attempt such a record. What drives someone to break a dumb record? The motivations are all across the board. [The Atlantic]


63 million people

Following protests, mobile Internet in the Gujarat state in India — home to 63 million — has been disabled and blocked. [The Next Web]


1 billion visitors

Facebook hit a milestone on Monday, founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced, with 1 billion people visiting the service in a single day. While Facebook has about 1.5 billion active monthly users, this is the first time the site has had 1 billion unique people visit in a day. [Slate]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

$7.99
The future has finally arrived: Amazon Prime upgraded its one-hour delivery business in Seattle to include booze. If you need hooch in an hour, there’s a $7.99 delivery fee for Prime members. But if you can plan a little bit ahead (and you can make the mixers last), two-hour delivery is free. Here’s hoping they roll this service out nationwide within a few days, because rye reserves are running low at Echo Base (my apartment) and we’re doing a “Rick & Morty” marathon. [Grubstreet]


12 arrests

Twelve people have been arrested in connection with the explosion in the Chinese port city of Tianjin that killed at least 139 people. Several managers of the company storing the chemicals believed to have triggered the inferno were among those arrested. [NPR]

99 percent

According to a new survey from the CDC, that’s the percentage of contact lens users who reported at least one unsafe habit, ranging from sleeping while still wearing contacts to showering or swimming with them. Today I learned: I should stop showering and swimming in contacts. Also, apparently water with a splash of vodka is not a legitimate substitute for contact lens solution, so I may have bigger problems. [Minneapolis Post]


3,318 years
James Holmes, who was found guilty last month of killing 12 people and wounding 70 in the Colorado movie theater mass shooting in 2012, was sentenced on Wednesday to 12 life sentences and the maximum 3,318 years in prison. [Reuters]

12,000 profiles
There’s been a lot of hoopla about the hacking and leak of Ashley Madison membership rolls. But an investigation found only about 12,000 active, real women on the site. [Gizmodo]

33,000 inboxes
Thomson Reuters suffered a reply-all apocalypse on Wednesday, when an employee named Vince accidentally sent an email that wound its way, through a catastrophic series of reply-alls, to 33,000 inboxes across the company. Remember, “please remove me from this email chain” only makes the problem worse, or from a one perspective (mine) vastly more interesting. [The Wall Street Journal]

2 million

Jorge Ramos, the anchor of Noticiero Univision, was thrown out of a Donald Trump press conference Tuesday after asking the real estate developer about his immigration policies. On Wednesday, Joe Scarborough — another foe of Trump — said Ramos was seeking 15 minutes of fame. Why is this hilarious? Scarborough helms MSNBC’s Morning Joe, which averages between 400,000 and 500,000 viewers. Noticiero Univision has, on average, about 2 million viewers. [@alexweprin]


9.9 million
Number of people worldwide who develop dementia every year, according to a report from Alzheimer’s Disease International. Globally, an estimated 46.8 million people suffer from Alzheimer’s, with a projected 131.5 million having the disease in 2050. [The Washington Post]

75 million

Number of devices currently running Windows 10, according to Microsoft. The company is aiming for 1 billion devices with the OS in the next several years. [NPR]


$47 billion
Syngenta, a Swiss agricultural company, turned down a $47 billion takeover bid from Monsanto. The resulting union would have been the largest agrochemical company on the planet. [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

6 seconds
Big Ben was running six seconds behind for the past two weeks, shaming the entire United Kingdom. [BBC]

9 percent
Share of New Yorker comics in the publication’s first 81 years that were about children or child-rearing, according to a new study. The study also found that the comics have become increasingly critical of children and the act of raising them. [Motherboard]

19th cousins
Fact: There is a conspiracy theory that Donald Trump is running for president to help Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton. Fact: A new genealogical analysis has found that Clinton and Trump are 19th cousins, with shared 18th great grandparents, John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, and Katherine Swynford, Duchess of Lancaster. Does this mean there is a conspiracy and that it’s been in the works for over 600 years? I’m just asking questions here. [The Hill]

36 airstrikes
On Monday, the U.S. and allies launched 36 airstrikes against the Islamic State. Five were in Syria, and 31 in Iraq. [Reuters]

£120 (about $200)

Cost of a bottle of cognac imbibed by a woman at Beijing Capital International Airport after she was told she could not bring the pricy booze on the plane. The bottle of Rémy Martin XO Excellence exceeded the flight limit, and eventually her BAC did as well; downing cognac is not a great way to talk your way on to a plane. Still, this person is my hero. [Yahoo]


249 copycats

Presumably seeking to piggyback off the meteoric rise of joke presidential candidate “Deez Nuts,” 249 enterprising copycat candidates have filed with the Federal Election Commission. They include Queen Elsa, Fidel Castro, Captain Crunch and Ronald Reagan’s Ghost. [Center for Public Integrity]


$900
Cost of a flamethrower, now commercially available. People are buying these up, fearing new regulations will be passed, and the flamethrower won’t be available for long. [Ars Technica]

10,000 warrants

Judge Donald McCullin has ordered the withdrawal of roughly 10,000 arrest warrants issued before Dec. 31, 2014, in Ferguson, Missouri. The motivation for the change was to reduce the incarceration of people unable to pay the lofty fees the city charges for frequent tickets. [The New York Times]

12,000 troops

The military’s ban on transgender service-members will end next May. The policy change will affect an estimated 12,000 members of the armed forces. [USA Today]


$1.5 million
A 12-year-old boy visiting a museum in Taiwan last weekend tripped and accidentally punched a hole in a Paolo Porpora painting worth $1.5 million. But it’s not a total loss: There’s a video of the incident, and it’s great. [Artnet]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

 9 percent

De Beers, the worldwide diamond empire, cut the price of diamonds by 9 percent this year, Bloomberg is reporting. So if you’re going to make a stupid decision in the next year or so, at least you can get a small discount on the ring. [Bloomberg]


30 countries
Twitter has chosen sides in the battle between privileged political elites and nonprofit government watchdogs, shutting down a service that monitored the Twitter accounts of politicians in 30 countries for deleted tweets. An example of how this was useful: Recently, Politwoops found several U.S. government officials deleting tweets supporting Bowe Bergdahl shortly before going on to criticize him as a traitor (and President Obama for negotiating his release). Could this have to do with Twitter’s own interests in lobbying the federal government? Who can say. [TechCrunch]

-51 percentage points

Shocking political news: Businessman Donald Trump is not super popular among Hispanics. His net favorability rating with the group is -51 percentage points. The next lowest GOP contender, Sen. Ted Cruz, has a net favorability rating of just -8 points. [Gallup]


200 miles
Estimated distance covered by New York’s sidewalk construction sheds, the scaffolding and plywood eyesores that protect pedestrians from falling debris whenever a luxury condo needs building. Efforts are underway to make the sheds more aesthetically pleasing, presumably for the people living in nearby luxury condos. [The New York Times] 

$1,500
The prize for catching the most snakes in the official Florida python hunt, which has attracted over 1,500 people to participate, including a U.S. senator. This is literally a Simpsons episode, right? [Tampa Bay Times]

4,000 Chipotle workers
Chipotle Mexican Grill wants to hire 4,000 people on a single day, Sept. 9. Why so many? Over the next year, Chipotle will add anywhere from 195 to 205 new stores. Perhaps one will be located in the Heights district of Jersey City, New Jersey, near that abandoned trophy store by the BP, and ideally open late night. Please. It’s just the delivery guy from Domino’s knows my name now, and somehow that’s what finally made it weird. [The Huffington Post]

$18,635

The stock market is having some issues. Still, chill out people. If you look at the historical performance of two investors who put $1,000 in the S&P 500 in 1980 — one skittish and one who never sells — the skittish investor would have $10,613 last week and the stalwart one would have $18,635. I’ve already forgotten my Fidelity.com password. [FiveThirtyEight]


$1.7 million
How much money Ashley Madison, a site for people seeking affairs, made in 2014 from its “full delete” service, which would ostensibly wipe out all the information the company had on a customer. [Motherboard]

10.1 million viewers

Number of people who tuned in to watch AMC’s “Fear The Walking Dead” on Sunday, a new cable record for most-watched premiere. The show is a spin-off of the hit series “Walking Dead.” [CNN Money]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

5 Hugos

The 2015 Hugo Awards were given out over the weekend. Well, most of them were. No award was given out in five categories. The “no awards” were the result of a campaign to vote as a group for more white and male authors, and a counter-campaign — led by the likes of no less than George R.R. Martin. The “no award” in five categories is the same number of “no awards” given in the entire history of the Hugos. [The Guardian]


36 days
“Dismaland,” an apocalyptic art installation theme park from the mind of Banksy and 57 other artists, will be open in the U.K. from Aug. 22 to Sept. 27. The brochure claims the Disneyland pastiche “contains adult themes, distressing imagery, extended use of strobe lighting, smoke effects and swearing” — fun for the whole family! [Colossal]

218 Anakins
In the year 2014, there were 218 babies born that were named “Anakin,” according to the official list released by the Social Security Administration. The kids were presumably named after the “Star Wars” character by parents who don’t realize Anakin eventually became Darth Vader. Or maybe they do and have bold ambitions for their progeny. [Entertainment Weekly]

260 permits
Alligator hunting began last Thursday in Alabama, with 260 lucky permit holders hoping to kill a large and ancient reptile. Last year, Mandy Stokes killed a record-setting beast, 15 feet and 1,011.5 pounds. [The New York Times]

1,100 sources

One of the best cartographers of the Syrian civil war is a 19-year-old Dutch teen, Thomas van Linge, who started mapping the war for a school project. He’s since graduated but is still keeping up with the cartography, synthesizing some 1,100 sources with new data on the multiparty conflict. [Der Spiegel]

$8.9 million

Safeway, which owns the defunct supermarket Dominick’s, owes Michael Jordan $8.9 million for using his name and likeness to shill products without his authorization. Safeway was hoping to pay only about $126,900, and Jordan’s people wanted about $10 million, so this is a pretty clean win for Jordan. [ESPN]


$298.5 million
Estimated payroll of the Los Angeles Dodgers after the acquisition of Chase Utley from the Philadelphia Phillies. That puts the Dodgers $1.5 million short of being baseball’s first $300 million payroll, a figure that may very well be hit following end-of-season bonuses. [ESPN]

$578 million
One of what I imagine will be many class-action lawsuits against the group behind Ashley Madison was filed on behalf of Canadians implicated in the stolen data breach, with lawyers seeking $578 million. [The Guardian]


$738 million
That’s how much Elon Musk’s Tesla raised from a stock sale. The money is planned to fuel investments like a battery factory and a new car line. For the rest of us, this also means that Musk himself spent $20 million on stock, meaning he has $20 million less to spend on a super laser or volcano base or shark pit or whatever else potential supervillains are buying these days. [Fortune]

$182 billion
Global markets took a big hit last week, with the S&P 500 enduring its worst week since 2011. This took a bite out of the world’s 400 richest people, who lost a collective $182 billion. Still, I’m sure they’ll pull through: The top 400 still have about $3.98 trillion combined. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

4-day workweek
Japanese retailer Uniqlo is trying out a four-day workweek for about 10,000 of its employees starting in October. This would mean three-day weekends, provided employees commit to longer hours during the week, Nate. [Bloomberg]

64
Tiger Woods had his best round of golf in two years, shooting a 6-under-par 64 at the Wyndham Championship. I assume it was a schadenfreude-fueled round of excellence after every other cheater got busted in the Ashley Madison leak. [The Guardian]

17 cases
Number of Guinea worm cases in the first five months of this year. Former President Jimmy Carter — who announced that he’s significantly paring back his travel to combat cancer — has made it one of his life’s goals to eradicate the parasite. Carter said at a news conference, “I hope the last Guinea worm dies before I do,” which is a great way to go out if I ever heard one. [Vox]

18 days
The pumpkin spice latte returns to Starbucks on Sept. 8. Get ready. As I walked through the sweltering bus terminal of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey this morning, sweating like a pig with the smell of garbage wafting through the air, I just knew that fall was right around the corner. [Refinery 29]


20 centimeters
The thickness of the glass on a planned street-spanning sky pool in London, presumably to be built so commuters can see your pasty, wealthy body as they just try to get through their day. It’ll be the first glass bridge pool connecting two apartment buildings across the street from each other, and might also be the first sign that the neighborhood has been gentrified. [The Guardian]


$120,000

Estimated cost of raising a ballerina, which includes $53,000 of ballet school tuition over 15 years, $32,000 on summer intensive programs, $29,000 on shoes and so on. Needless to say, ballet is a rich person’s art form because of the considerable expense involved. [FiveThirtyEight]


$140,000

The estimated value of having LeBron James tweet about your brand once. [ESPN]


28,443,856

The number of small businesses in the United States, which together employ about 56,062,893 workers. [Forbes]

$52 million 
How much Jennifer Lawrence made from June 2014 to June 2015, making her the highest-paid actress of the period. Still, this means that the pay gap between the highest-paid man and woman is $28 million, given that Robert Downey Jr. pulled in an estimated $80 million over the period. [AV Club]

$19.43 billion
How much the United Nations asked for to fund a response to humanitarian crises in Syria, South Sudan and Nepal this year. They’re only about a third of the way there. Have they considered calling the guy building the stupid pool in London? [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

$525
The price of a 45-minute intravenous dose of the club drug ketamine at a clinic in New York City for the severely depressed and suicidal. In recent years, there has been a wave of doctors opening facilities that specialize in using the sedative pharmaceutical to remedy deep psychological pain in patients. [Bloomberg]

9 percent
“Deez Nuts” is, from a paperwork perspective, a legitimate independent candidate for the presidency — and is polling at 9 percent in North Carolina, according to a new Public Policy Polling survey. [Public Policy Polling]


1,078
Ever hear of p-hacking? It’s the process of narrowing or widening a data set to obtain a publishable scientific result. It’s common, and it’s surprisingly easy, as you’ll see in this FiveThirtyEight interactive graphic: Of 1,800 possible combinations of variables, 1,078 will yield a publishable result! [FiveThirtyEight]

3,173 percent
Each state has their preferred vice, and in New York, it’s the noble pickleback — a staunch shot of whiskey promptly followed by a sour, palate-cleansing shot of pickle juice. According to Foursquare, New Yorkers mention the shot-chaser combo 3,173 percent more than residents of other states. [Time Out New York]

$126,900

Michael Jordan is suing defunct grocery store chain Dominick’s over the use of his name to sell products. This has raised the question of what exactly “Michael Jordan,” the proper noun, is worth. It’s $126,900, according to an expert witness called by the chain in the civil trial. [The Chicago Tribune]

200,000
The approximate number of criminal truancy cases against children and parents in Texas in 2013. Starting next month, students in the Lone Star State will no longer face charges for playing hooky. And courts have to wipe the charges from students’ records. [The Texas Observer]


$220 million
The amount of money raised for ALS research through the ice bucket challenge, a funding campaign that went viral last year and is beginning to yield results. Money raised through the challenge helped support recently published research by Johns Hopkins scientists, who say their study is an important step toward finding a cure for or slowing the disease. [CBS News]

$538 million
The amount of revenue that the cosmetics company It Works! says it had last year. The multilevel-marketing company relies on a network of distributors using digital social networks like Facebook to recruit new customers. [Tech Insider]

274

The United Arab Emirates has the biggest gender imbalance in the world, with 274 men for every 100 women. That’s primarily due to the large numbers of male foreign workers who move to the country without their families. [The Washington Post]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
8-0
Chaos at the Little League Softball World Series: A team from Washington was accused of throwing a game, which it lost 8-0, to prevent an Iowa team from advancing in the tournament. But officials stepped in and called for the two teams to meet in a special tiebreaker game, which the Iowa team won 3-2. The Iowans were later eliminated from the tournament by a team from Rhode Island. [WhoTV, Des Moines Register]



9.7 gigabytes




And the shoe has finally dropped: Hackers who stole data from AshleyMadison.com, a dating service for people looking to have an affair, have posted it on the Internet, all 9.7 gigs’ worth of email addresses, credit card data and personal information. Before you get giddy — yeah, it does have the makings of some sort of modern fable in which wannabe cheaters get their comeuppance — just a standard reminder that if you download it and look through it for people you might know, there’s no turning back from that. And somewhere out there, there’s a database of stuff you do that you would prefer not get out there. Mine was on Spotify, her name was Idina Menzel, and I already confronted that demon. Just advising — tread carefully here. [Wired]

56
The percentage of Americans who have not taken a vacation in the past 12 months, according to new research. That represents an increase of about 10 million people from the previous year. [Los Angeles Times]

64 retractions

Springer, an academic publisher, has issued retractions for 64 papers after the discovery that some peer reviews may have been faked. [The Washington Post]

95 percent
A report compiled for Public Health England found that electronic cigarettes — which release nicotine-infused vapor rather than combusted tobacco — are 95 percent less harmful than typical cigarettes. While that doesn’t mean they’re safe, the experts said they hoped that in the future, doctors would be able to prescribe electronic cigarettes to patients trying to stop smoking typical cigarettes. [BBC]

Mile 419.9 
The holy grail for a stoner apartment is a stolen mile marker 420, a number that has significance in cannabis culture. This means that these signs are stolen all the time. Idaho has now joined Colorado and Washington in removing mile marker 420 on highways and replacing it with mile marker 419.9. [Fox News]

1,200 bottles
Burglars opened 1,200 bottles of Koenig Pilsener beer in a store in Germany, apparently in an attempt to win a promotional prize involving bottle caps. You know, like in that episode of “Futurama” in which Fry goes to the Slurm factory, only real and in Germany and far dumber. [NBC News]

$1 billion
Valuation for the company behind messaging app Kik after a $50 million investment from Chinese tech powerhouse Tencent Holdings. Kik competes with larger rivals like Snapchat and Facebook’s WhatsApp, but for some reason, people like to talk to each other through the Internet, so the space appears promising. [Bloomberg]

$11.4 billion
The amount of money that a new report says will be spent on political ads during the 2016 election, roughly $1 billion of which will be digital advertisements. Iowans, now is a great time to download Adblock Pro — but be sure to disable it on FiveThirtyEight.com, your No. 1 source for news and analysis about the 2016 election. Please. I owe so much money to student loan lenders. [Wired]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 women
The first women will graduate from the Army’s Ranger School this week. The Army opened up the prestigious and grueling school to women in January. [NPR]

20 to 50 percent
A Berklee College of Music report says that 20 percent to 50 percent of royalty payments aren’t getting to the correct musicians or rights-holders. That is partially because of the wildly changing economics of the music business: With streaming services calculating how much to pay, old databases and a byzantine royalty structure to be navigated, it’s not super surprising that some cash is flowing into cracks. [Fusion]

58
The percentage of Americans who have a favorable view of labor unions, according to a Gallup survey. That’s a 5 percentage point increase from last year. [Politico]

 61 percent

One way we can track America’s obesity problem is through the military, because the government is able to contractually weigh a whole bunch of people. Since 2002, there has been a 61 percent increase in obesity among active-duty forces, according to a new report. [Associated Press]

110 years
The oldest known American veteran has died at the age of 110. Emma Didlake joined the Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps in 1943. [San Antonio Express-News] 


305 documents
Screeners poring over 30,000 messages from the private email account that Hillary Clinton used during her time as secretary of state have referred 305 of them for additional review before they can be released. [Bloomberg]

800 euros
A woman in Spain was fined 800 euros after posting a photograph of a police vehicle in a disabled parking spot to Facebook. She was punished under a new law that prohibits the use of images of officers that might jeopardize their safety. The law is called the Citizens Security Law — which is pretty rich, you know? [The Guardian]

$16,080

Derivative apps are nothing new: How often do you read the phrasing “Uber, but for ____” in articles about new apps? Apparently, the cost of cloning a popular app like Uber or Snapchat isn’t actually all that high. If you wanted to build a structural, technological clone of Tinder — just the core essential features of swiping left and right on people’s pictures — it would set you back about $10,800 on software development hiring site Gigster. So it turns out that my “Uber, but for geckos you can release in your apartment in lieu of calling an exterminator when you find bugs” business would cost me only $16,080 for a minimum viable product Uber clone! The science is behind me, and I am now pursuing funding. Hit me up VCs. [Priceonomics]

334,000
Remember back in May when the IRS said thieves had accessed the tax information of about 100,000 Americans on the agency’s website as part of a scheme to steal tax refunds? Yeah, the agency announced Monday that the number of potential victims was actually about 334,000. [Associated Press]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



