
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2.7 percent
That’s the average level of support New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie earned in three Republican primary polls conducted during July. That’s low enough that Christie is in danger of missing the first GOP debate on Aug. 6. [FiveThirtyEight]

3rd place
NASA had a big week last week, mostly because they managed to take lots of pictures of dwarf planet Pluto, but also because they got a lot of people interested in seeing those images. NASA.gov was the third-highest trafficked government-run domain last week. Who could have ever guessed that people were still interested in space? [The Washington Post]

54 years

The U.S. embassy in Cuba reopened Monday after 54 years of being shuttered. [CNN]

71 percent
There’s an avian flu outbreak among U.S. chickens, and lots of birds are being killed to contain the virus. About 71 percent of the 48 million culled chickens were egg-laying or related to the egg-layers. This has driven prices of eggs up, to the point that eggs are “more expensive on a protein-per-dollar basis than chicken breasts for the first time on record.” [Quartz]

$93
Google stock exploded Friday for some reason, jumping $93 to close at $672.93. This means that, over the course of a single day, Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin each added $4 billion to their net worths. [Bloomberg]

3,500 acres
A huge fire consuming 3,500 acres broke out around I-15 in California on Friday, destroying 20 vehicles and four homes. [Los Angeles Times]

278,000
“Joe Dirt 2” is not getting rave reviews, precisely, but the direct-to-streaming film starring David Spade reportedly garnered 278,000 viewers on Crackle in its first 24 hours. [AV Club]

$58 million
“Ant-Man” won the weekend at the box office with $58 million, edging out “Minions” and “Trainwreck.” [CNN]

$160 million
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is looking into potential wrongdoing by FIFA sponsors. The SEC is investigating a $160 million deal involving “Sportswear Company A.” The description of the sportswear company suggests it’s Nike, Reuters reported, although Nike is not named in any investigation at the moment. [Reuters]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
$13.36

SherpaShare, an app that helps drivers keep track of the money they make while ferrying people through ride-sharing apps, has a new report out about its users. Uber trips, according to SherpaShare, cost an average of $13.36 and Lyft trips cost $12.53. [Time]

20 percent
The San Francisco Bay area’s public transportation system, BART, has seen ridership jump 20 percent since 2012, and the system is under a heavy load without the money needed to maintain it. If only the Silicon Valley area was able to come up with some sort of way to pay for this. Maybe BART should pitch itself as a subscription-based, ride-sharing commuter distribution platform seeing huge growth numbers over the past several quarters with little runway but impressive growth potential. That’ll get some suckers to open their wallets. [San Francisco Business Times]

33 percent
That’s the percent of people 65 and older who think that Americans work too little, the highest percentage to hold that view among any age bracket. I’m sure all of us in the workforce appreciate retirees’ thoughts on the matter. [YouGov]

38 lawmakers
Greece has agreed to a bailout! Naturally, this means even more political chaos in Greece. Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras is the leader of the Syriza party, which has 149 seats in the nation’s parliament. But 38 Syriza members voted against the bailout Tsipras negotiated. Since that’s a quarter of his coalition, this could mean a leadership challenge, a coalition government, or even snap elections. The Greeks sure have to vote on lots of things — side effect of inventing this whole democracy thing, I suppose. [Bloomberg]

126 grams
The average American consumer buys 126 grams of sugars by way of packaged foods and soft drinks every day. [Fusion]

12,734 pounds
That’s how much caviar the U.S. imported in 2014. Because Iran produces lots of caviar, that could go up if the Iranian nuclear deal makes it through Congress. [Quartz]

$46,725,329.13
That’s how much money the Clinton campaign has brought in so far, according to its first FEC filing. The campaign has been seriously burning through money, though, spending $19 million already. [CNN]

$213,606,575
According to his financial disclosure forms, Donald Trump made $213,606,575 from doing 14 seasons of The Apprentice. But given that disclosure involves Donald Trump and money, and that the documents were written like a brochure at a marketing seminar, proceed with caution. [Business Insider]

2.53 billion gallons
That’s how much pig excrement is produced by the state of North Carolina annually. All of that needs to go somewhere, and often that somewhere is reservoirs of excrement pushing into poor communities. I’m saving this stat about pig shit for the next time I’m stuck at a bar in March and the Duke game is on. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0.5 percent
The President granted clemency to 46 people Monday who were in prison for drug offenses. This brings the percent of commutation requests granted over the course of his presidency to 0.5 percent, higher than both President Bushes but less than President Nixon, Ford, Carter, Reagan or Clinton. [FiveThirtyEight]

11 percent
According to a new poll, 11 percent of Americans feel the U.S. will never recover from the 2008 financial crisis. [YouGov]

13 runs
Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker is running for president, and the guy has experience: he’s run for office 13 times, winning 11 of those races. Donald Trump’s record…doesn’t quite compare. [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel]

19 times

By one count, the number of times Walker has tweeted about his haircut. [Christopher Ingraham]

83 percent
“We should just give people with PTSD some MDMA” may seem like something a person who was on MDMA would say, but there’s legitimate evidence that it may aid some people recovering from a traumatic event. One study found 83 percent of patients on MDMA saw a reduction in symptoms. Now there’s going to be a clinical study in Canada looking into this further. [MacLean’s]

$5 million
50 Cent owes a woman $5 million after a judge found he violated her privacy when releasing a private sex tape. In plausibly related news: 50 Cent declared bankruptcy Monday. [The Wall Street Journal]

$5.9 million
The City of New York agreed to settle with the family of Eric Garner, who died after being placed in a chokehold by the NYPD, for $5.9 million. The city had until Friday to reach a settlement or else face a lawsuit. [The Guardian]

$10 million 

I am a long-time advocate for innovative biological solutions to difficult biological problems. So of course I’m thrilled to hear of a Texas plan to spend $10 million introducing an invasive European wasp to fight back against an invasive European weed that’s clogging up the Rio Grande. [Bloomberg]

65 million
Netflix is expected to announce it has 65 million worldwide subscribers Wednesday, which sent the price of its shares up 5 percent. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1.5 kilometers
The head of the Sinaloa Cartel escaped from a maximum security Mexican prison this weekend through a 1.5-kilometer tunnel the cartel had evidently constructed. This is the second time that Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman has escaped from prison, and something tells me incarceration has not helped him learn his lesson or made him change his ways. [ABC News]

3 titles
Novak Djokovic won his third Wimbledon title this past weekend. He then ate some grass, because the trophy wasn’t filling. [Digg]

20 colleges
Twenty schools are responsible for a fifth of all grad school college loan debt, a group that counts among its number several for-profit colleges, expensive private schools and off-shore medical schools. [The Washington Post]

$23 million
The Decision: LeBron James signed a one-year contract to stay in Cleveland next year, with an option for another year following it. [Cleveland.com]

25 percent
Advertisements take up more bandwidth than one might think. AdBlock Plus funded a study to see what would happen if an entire college network used its product, and Simon Fraser University saw overall data transfer on its network drop 25 percent. [Slashdot]

$65 million

That’s the tax haul for Washington state after its first year of legal marijuana. Pot sales brought in more than $260 million in their first year. [Reuters]

$115 million

“Minions” took the top spot at the box office this weekend, heralding a new benchmark in the gradual decline of western civilization. Domestically, the film made $115.2 million. [Los Angeles Times]

460 visits
That’s the estimate for the number of “Make-a-Wish” foundation visits that professional wrestler John Cena has made, a record for the organization that matches sick kids with people they want to meet. [New York Post]

$985 million
That’s how much the International Olympic Committee reported it took in from the 2004 Athens Games. The games were nowhere near as fruitful for the host nation, which is now trying to handle a series of crippling debts while still having the real estate detritus of a sports event from a decade ago. [Politico Europe]

$60.59 billion
Estimate for how much money Americans will spend on their pets in 2015, about 25 percent higher than how much they spent in 2010. Dogs are the most expensive to raise. [NBC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0
Number of ticker-tape parades in New York City that honored only women between 1961 and 2014. On Friday, the U.S. women’s national soccer team — winners of this year’s World Cup — breaks that spell. [FiveThirtyEight]

12
The number of U.S. presidents who did not have a college degree. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker is expected to be the only major candidate in the 2016 contest without one. Among the 2016 candidates, the most common pre-politics occupation is lawyer. There are also a handful of businesspeople and doctors. [National Journal]

17 stars
A Confederate battle flag shown on the U.S. House floor in a debate over its removal from federal property had an incorrect number of stars, 17 rather than 13. What’s the worst that can happen, the South actually rising again? Right, yeah. [The Hill]

70 percent
Bloodstream infections that occur when bacteria get into central lines, the tubes that hospitals insert into patients’ chests to deliver medications, are a disconcerting cause of death in the U.S. health-care system. There’s a five-step procedure to reduce the risk — intensive care units in Michigan that implemented the checklist cut central line infections by 70 percent, according to one study. [Vox]

999 kilobytes

The largest ever bitcoin transaction — a 999 kilobyte file’s worth of the cryptocurrency — was completed Tuesday when a Chinese mining consortium sought to stymie an attack on the process that facilitates bitcoin transactions. [Motherboard]

$390,000
Tough luck for Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker: A meeting with hedge fund billionaire Daniel Loeb reportedly went badly, and Loeb declined to support Walker’s nascent presidential campaign because of the governor’s opposition to same-sex marriage. In 2012, Loeb gave $390,000 to independent expenditure committees, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. [Business Insider and the Center for Responsive Politics]

4 million
That’s the number of Americans currently wearing braces, according to the American Association of Orthodontists. It sucks, kids, but it’s worth it. [The Atlantic]

22.1 million
Hacks of federal Office of Personnel Management databases keep looking worse and worse: The government said Thursday that 22.1 million people were affected. Seriously though, how on Earth do you find a guy who can fence 1.1 million fingerprint records you found when they fell off a truck? Who would possibly buy them? Batman? [The Washington Post]

$114 million
Jeb Bush and his super PAC allies hauled in more than $114 million from donors in the first six months of the year. [Associated Press]

Have a great weekend. If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 shots

Norwegian police officers fired their guns a mere two times in the line of duty in 2014; no one was killed or injured. In the past 12 years, only two people have been killed by police in shootouts. [The Local]

3.5 hours
A technical problem halted trading on the New York Stock Exchange from about 11:30 a.m. to just after 3 p.m. Eastern time. The market was not able to provide accurate data, and the exchange’s president suspended trading. [Bloomberg]

12 times
In what is by far the weirdest story I have heard all week, mustachioed actor Tom Selleck has been accused by a Southern California municipal water district of using a commercial truck to pull water from a hydrant and bring it back to his home — on 12 different occasions. The district has filed suit against the actor. [The Hollywood Reporter]

10 days
It looks like Maine Gov. Paul LePage may have messed up. He had 10 days to veto a bill he opposes that gives aid to immigrant asylum-seekers but did not. His office says that by not acting on the legislation, the governor in fact pulled off a “pocket veto,” killing the bill. However, legislative leaders and opponents of the governor say that is not how it works in Maine and that LePage’s inaction actually means the bill has become law. [Maine Beacon]

23 seasons
Comedy Central renewed “South Park” for three more seasons, which will bring the show through 2019 and 23 seasons. [Variety]

45 percent
The percentage of U.S. companies that log their employees’ keystrokes, according to an American Management Association survey. That’s one way employers have increased their monitoring of workers. [The Week]

46-0
Vanuatu crushed Micronesia 46-0 in a men’s soccer Olympic qualifying tournament. Interestingly, Vanuatu had to run up the score against Micronesia in its quest to avoid elimination from the tournament. It didn’t work. [The Guardian]

90 cities
Taco Bell is now a delivery option for customers in 90 cities in the Los Angeles, San Francisco and Dallas metropolitan areas. This ends very badly for me in several months after the service rolls out in Jersey City — I can see it now. [Eater]

$230,000
A Texas woman who was hounded by robocalls from Time Warner Cable was awarded $230,000 by a judge after she sued the company. In related news, justice is real in the world. [Associated Press]

14.99 million
That’s the new estimate for California’s Latino population, which now exceeds the state’s white population. [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

1 month
Bangkok, Thailand, is in the middle of a water crisis, with the city’s tap water supply in danger of running out within a month if there isn’t any rain. [Thomson Reuters Foundation]


15 cases

There’s an outbreak of rabbit fever (tularemia) among Coloradans, the result of a particularly good year for the wild rabbit’s elusive prey, vegetation. With more vegetation, rabbits are making even more rabbits, increasing the risk to humans of contracting the relatively rare disease. [Associated Press]


56 percent
That’s the proportion of traffic to larger websites that originates from bots like Google’s Web crawlers and programs designed to look like humans, according to a study published this year by a Web security company. The whole Internet traffic game — determining who gets seen and how much — is a shockingly murky enterprise, with lots of different ways for thumbs to get on the scales. [FiveThirtyEight]


60 trainees
In May, the U.S. government launched a program to train up to 5,400 Syrian opposition fighters per year to combat the Islamic State militant group. In testimony before Congress on Tuesday, the secretary of defense acknowledged that the U.S. was so far training only about 60, which is a little larger than an NFL team roster but nowhere near big enough to field an orchestra. Quiver in fear before our mighty force, ISIS! There are about as many fighters in “Super Smash Bros. 4.” [The Daily Star]


$74.95


The MSRP for a forthcoming edition of Risk stylized as the continents from “Game of Thrones.” Unfortunately, there are no Greyjoy sigil armies available, so I will just drink Kraken on the sidelines and casually flip over pieces when nobody is looking. [The Wall Street Journal]


$100 to $1,000 per day

Those are the fines that businesses on the Hawaiian island of Oahu face if they don’t comply with a ban on plastic bags that now covers the whole state. [Mashable]



$300,000
Harry Shearer reportedly will sign on for additional seasons of “The Simpsons” to the tune of $300,000 per episode. [The Guardian]


1 in 292,201,338

The probability of a given ticket winning the Powerball lottery jackpot will drop in October to 1 in 292,201,338 from its current probability of 1 in 175,223,510. [The Buffalo News]

$1 billion per minute of trading

The Chinese stock market is tanking at an impressive rate, losing almost $1 billion for each minute of trading on mainland exchanges over a three-week period. Official sources are blaming foreign investors and short sellers. But the data? Yeah, that explanation doesn’t make sense considering actual volume. [Bloomberg]

$3.28 billion
That’s the 2014 global sales figure for Oreos, which dominate the cookie market. This week, there’s a new addition to the Oreo product line — Thins, which have fewer calories than the originals. [The Washington Post]




If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

12 feet high
Boston had a rough winter. There’s still a 12-foot-high pile of ice and detritus left over from the city’s record snowfall, the remnants of a 75-foot-high pile. [The New York Times]


18 percent

A class-action lawsuit alleges that the New York Police Department has issued 850,000 unjustified summonses as part of a quota system. New filings in the case charge that the city has not turned over any emails from the files of the former police commissioner or former chief of department on the topic of summonses, which is a little peculiar. Attorneys in the lawsuit are alleging evidence destruction. A recent study out of John Jay College found that 18 percent of summonses from 2003 to 2013 were dismissed because of legal insufficiency. [New York Daily News]

37-3
The South Carolina Senate voted 37-3 to remove the Confederate battle flag from the grounds of the state Capitol. Should the state’s House of Representatives agree, it will be the second time that South Carolina has had to move the Confederate flag because of external pressure. [The Post and Courier]


725 jobs
As processed grain manufacturers deal with the changing tastes of the American breakfast consumer, General Mills plans to cut somewhere between 675 and 725 jobs. [Associated Press]

1,900 arrests
Madhya Pradesh, a state in India, is in the middle of a scandal over allegations that thousands of people since 2007 have paid bribes to have their results on exams to score government jobs and positions in medical schools changed. There have been lots of arrests. [Quartz]


5,061 miles

A solar-powered plane completed a 5,061-mile trip across the Pacific from Japan to Hawaii in 118 hours — making it the longest solo nonstop flight ever. [Engadget]

$20,000 fine


Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York is pushing legislation that would toughen the penalties for telemarketers that violate the national “Do Not Call” list. If the bill becomes law, companies who push robocalls without getting prior written consent will be hit with a fine of up to $20,000 for each violation, up to 10 years in prison, or both. [The Hill]


$332,500

New York City will pay a total of $332,500 to six Occupy Wall Street protesters who were pepper-sprayed by police. [Associated Press]

25.4 million
The Women’s World Cup final on Sunday was the most-watched single-network soccer match in U.S. history, with an estimated 25.4 million viewers, according to Fox. [Slate]




If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.






