
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 squirrels

Two squirrels in Yosemite National Park have died from the plague, leading officials to shut down a campsite. Did you know that 42 people have caught the plague in California since 1970? Did you know that apparently plague is still a thing? All of this is new and horrifying information to me. [Associated Press]

14 acres
Disney announced that it will build new “Star Wars” attractions at both Walt Disney World and Disneyland — 14 acres each. Full disclosure: I work for Disney (it owns ESPN, which owns FiveThirtyEight). Fuller disclosure: “Star Wars” plays an unsuitably large role in my life in general, so, yeah, I’m kind of a homer on thinking this is swell. [CNN Money]

20 years
The sperm of a ferret named Scarface who has been dead for about 20 years was successfully used for breeding. The black-footed ferret is critically endangered, which I suppose kind of — but not entirely — explains why someone has been holding on to ferret semen since the Clinton administration. [ScienceDaily]

70 times
The investigation into the explosions in Tianjin harbor continues, with reports emerging that a warehouse near the blasts may have held 70 times the allowed amount of sodium cyanide, a toxic chemical that is not supposed to be next to apartment buildings. [The Guardian]

95 percent

A yearlong investigation by the Tampa Bay Times found that the Pinellas County School Board had transformed five schools in the county’s black neighborhoods into “failure factories” by abandoning integration and breaking promises of new resources. About 95 percent of black students tested at the schools are failing reading or math. [Tampa Bay Times]

250 babies
Nine months ago, Buffalo was hit with a freak storm that dropped 7 feet of snow on the city. That means that this month, Mercy Hospital is delivering a slightly higher-than-normal number of babies. Ask your parents to explain that. In a typical August, Mercy welcomes about 200 new Buffalonians, but this month, the hospital is expecting about 250. [NBC New York]

 1,000 scholarships
LeBron James’s foundation will pay the tuition to the University of Akron for more than 1,000 kids participating in the “I Promise” program. [SB Nation]


15,000
Donald Trump has released a set of immigration policy proposals. He wants to triple the number of Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents who detain and deport undocumented immigrants to 15,000, end the citizenship granted to anyone born in the U.S. regardless of their parentage, and increase just about any fee involved in getting from Mexico to the U.S. [ABC News]

$56.1 million
N.W.A. biopic “Straight Outta Compton” won the box office this weekend, hauling in $56.1 million. That’s the biggest-ever opening weekend for an R-rated movie in August. [Variety]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
6 years
Jimmy Fallon is going to be on “The Tonight Show” through 2021. The host recently re-upped with NBC, signing a six-year deal. [Associated Press]

10 staffers
Donald Trump is investing in the ground game in Iowa: The campaign has 10 full-time paid staffers in the state. For what it’s worth, Jeb Bush has about a dozen. [Washington Post]

$40 per month
Apple has reportedly pushed back a plan to become a TV provider after failing to reach an agreement with content producers. Apple was rumored to be trying to offer a TV package for about $40 per month, undercutting the price people pay for cable. [Bloomberg]

54 percent
Tough news on the home front for New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie: According to a new poll, 54 percent of New Jersey voters want the governor to step down if he’s going to continue his run for president. [NJ.com]

70.1 percent
The latest data on commuting in America is out from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey, and it shows that Americans still really love driving. In 2013, 70.1 percent of Americans 16 to 24 drove alone on their commute. And while that’s lower than the rest of the age groups — 76.4 percent of Americans overall drive alone on their commute — it’s still pretty high. The New York City metropolitan area — where I live — has only 56.9 percent of workers commuting by private automobile, the lowest rate in the country. [Census.gov]

$5,000
When it comes to foolproof ways to win in a casino, “fake chips” are a pretty good option. But best not to flush them down a toilet. A man recently admitted to using millions in fake Borgata chips in Atlantic City, but only after being discovered because he tried to flush $5,000 worth of them. In fairness, this is likely the least illegal thing surreptitiously flushed down an Atlantic City casino toilet in years. [Yahoo News]

$225,000

About $225,000 worth of cocaine was smuggled into Harlem and Brooklyn through Puerto Rico in stuffed toys. Some of the toys were from the Minions franchise, that movie that has been ruining your Facebook feed. [Brooklyn Magazine]

$2.1 million
Ted Wells, who was in charge of the Deflategate investigation, is buying an apartment in midtown Manhattan from tennis siblings Venus and Serena Williams. [The Washington Post]


$536.6 million

That’s how much Michael Jordan has made from sponsorships from 2000 to 2012. According to Jordan, the vast majority of it came from shoe retailer Nike. This kind of data very rarely hits the public eye: Jordan is suing a defunct grocery story for trading upon his name, and the data came out through financial disclosures released as part of the lawsuit. [Bloomberg]

£1.85 billion
Estimated cost of building a life-size replica of Minas Tirith, a Lord of the Rings locale, in the U.K., according to a group of architects trying to raise the ludicrous amount of money through a crowdfunding campaign. If you know a rich Tolkien nerd, please alert them to this endeavor. We have to do this before the Welsh finish their life-size replica of Minas Morgul. [The Telegraph]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 years

The last recorded case of polio in sub-Saharan Africa occurred a little more than a year ago, on July 24, 2014. Barring any new cases, it’s only about three years until sub-Saharan Africa can be declared polio-free. There have been 34 cases of polio around the world in 2015 thus far, down from a half million in 1980. Nice work. [AllAfrica]

13 two sided sheets

Someone has found another manuscript — only 13 two-sided sheets worth of story — from a dead or infirm beloved literary figure to milk for some cheap cash. Isn’t this just classic publishing industry nons–
Wait. It’s a Tolkien story? Sweet.
It’s out in August in the U.K., but it’ll be out in April in the U.S. Where’s my passport? I think it’s time for an unexpected journey. [Wall Street Journal]

21 tons of TNT
A huge explosion rocked the harbor of Tianjin in northern China on Wednesday. At least 44 people are dead from the fires and blasts, which originated in a warehouse holding volatile chemicals. There were several individual explosions during the inferno; the largest produced the force equivalent to 21 tons of TNT detonating. [BBC and Reuters]

28 hours
The driver of a truck that caused a serious injury to actor Tracy Morgan and killed another person had been up for 28 consecutive hours prior to the crash. [Bloomberg]

32 exoplanets
I guess we ran out of mythological figures, because the International Astronomical Union is allowing people to vote on the names of exoplanets in other solar systems. Obviously a bunch of nerds showed up, so we’re probably going to have planets named after hobbits. Speaking of, vote for my “Bilbo” entry! [Popular Science]

40 interns
Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen are being sued by 40 current and former interns for wage theft. At least it’s not 80 interns suing, all of them identical twins who alternated their intern duties as they saw fit. [Moviefone]

2,500 jobs
Kraft Heinz Co. — the Frankenfood empire that resulted from a Warren Buffett-orchestrated merger in March — is looking to cut 2,500 of its roughly 46,000 employees to reduce costs. [Reuters]

20,000 Sun King Beer Cans
An Indianapolis brewery printed “TOM BRADY SUX” in the expiration date on its cans thanks to the initiative taken by an employee only known as Biscuit. This raises more questions than it answers, namely which of you FiveThirtyEight Deflategate commenters owns a brewery and why haven’t you said this before? [ESPN]

$5,818,808
According to documents obtained by Gawker, that’s how much money Buzzfeed spent in “cost of revenue” in the first six months of 2014, which includes money paid to places like Facebook for advertising campaigns the site was running. Buying traffic has become a big part of how sites drive traffic to advertiser posts — you need to get a certain number of eyeballs on sponsored content and the advertising copy might not cut it. [Gawker]


96 million
Someone dumped 96 million black floating “shade balls” into Los Angeles’s water supply! But it’s cool, because that someone is the city of Los Angeles and they are trying to protect the water they do have from evaporation. It’s the latest in a series of schemes, the main one being “just use less water.” [The Huffington Post]








CORRECTION (Aug. 13, 11:20 a.m.): An earlier version of this article misspelled the names of Mary-Kate Olsen and her sister Ashley.





If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 per minute
The Perseids meteor shower peaks this week! At around 3 a.m. Thursday morning make your way out of your apartment, home, or local bar and look skyward. The weather looks good for most of the U.S. and the moon won’t be much of an issue either. At the peak, you’ll catch about one shooting star per minute. [Associated Press]

2 humvees
Ferguson, Missouri has been ordered by the Department of Defense to return two of the four military surplus humvees it acquired as part of a program that distributed extra military hardware to police departments around the country. [The Guardian]

6 to 10 weeks
New York Jets quarterback Geno Smith has sustained an injury to his jaw after being punched in the locker room by a teammate. He’ll be out for 6 to 10 weeks. The punch was reportedly about reimbursement for a $600 plane ticket. The Jets are back, people. [FiveThirtyEight]

26 percent
That’s Sen. Bernie Sanders’s average support among Iowa Democrats in July polls, down from 29 percent in June. Support for the more-liberal-than-Clinton candidate appears to have leveled off in the early primary states as people form an opinion about him. [FiveThirtyEight]

28 athletes
After testing old samples for evidence of doping, the International Association of Athletics Federations has punished 28 athletes who competed in the 2005 and 2007 track and field world championships. [NPR]

80 seconds
An 80-second video of an art installation that lit a 500-meter ladder on fire is making the rounds, mostly because it looks super metal and is oddly terrifying. [Time]


174 percent

Pork belly prices are up to $1.70 per pound wholesale, up 174 percent from the recent five-year low this past April. The pork market can be pretty volatile — demand is high now, but changes based on how much bacon the market wants to throw on everything, and supply can take a hit from disease in pig populations — but overall this is good news for farmers, who are otherwise seeing a 29 percent drop in pork prices overall. [Bloomberg]

$883,913
That’s how much money Rick Perry’s campaign for the presidency had on hand just a month ago on July 15. It apparently hasn’t been enough to keep the lights on for portions of his campaign — the staff in South Carolina is not being paid anymore, according to CBS reports. [The Washington Post]

3.5 million
How many drivers on the road are aged 85 and older, a 47 percent rise between 2003 and 2013. There are another 10.8 million drivers aged 75 to 84, and the elderly remain a major consumer group for car companies seeing reduced demand from other age brackets flocking to urban centers. [Bloomberg]

2 billion years ago

An analysis of the energy output of an area comprising 200,000 nearby galaxies found energy output is at half the level it was 2 billion years ago. The universe needs to quit slacking off. [Universe Today]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.





--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5.9 percent
Google — which mints money to the tune of $60 billion per year — is doing a major restructuring, and the mother company is getting a new name in the process. Alphabet Inc. will be the general conglomerate, under which Google will comprise many of the ways the company makes money (YouTube, Android, etc.). Alphabet will also oversee Google’s venture capital, investment and moonshot projects, like the life extension and science fiction arms of the company. Shares were up 5.9 percent in after-hours trading on the news. [Bloomberg]

33 days

U.S. Astronaut Scott Kelly has successfully grown food in space. The first batch of lettuce took 33 days to grow in May of 2014, and the food was sent back to Kennedy Space Center for testing to make sure it didn’t lead to some sort of Fantastic Four-ish cosmic superpower situation. The latest batch was scheduled to be consumed Monday. No word on whether taste testing applications are still being accepted. [Christian Science Monitor]

Roughly 40 percent
Right now about 10,000 firefighters are trying to put out or contain the fires coursing through California’s forests. About 40 percent of them are inmates. [Capital Public Radio]

41 percent
The number of worldwide users of ad-block browser software rose 41 percent year over year to 198 million. Adobe and PageFair estimated the cost of ad blocking to publishers was $21.8 billion. Is now a good time to disclose that one of those ad-block users is me, even though ad blockers are a plausible existential threat to the industry in which I work? [Yahoo Finance]

57 protestors
Dozens — including faith leaders and activists — were arrested yesterday at a “Moral Monday” event in Ferguson commemorating the death of Michael Brown. Later in the day, protesters blocked off all lanes of Interstate 70, and more were arrested overnight. [Buzzfeed]

566,000 subscribers

The net loss in pay TV subscribers last quarter, the second-worst net loss ever for that quarter. The number of households that pay for television is shrinking about 0.7 percent annually. [DSL Reports]

1.7 million
Estimated number of U.S. workers who were paid less than the federal minimum wage illegally in 2014. Two-thirds were women, and this doesn’t even count people who are paid less than their state or local minimum wages. [CBS News]

13.8 million
Number of people in the U.S. living in high-poverty circumstances, up from 7.2 million in 2000. [The Century Foundation]


$586 million
That’s how much money the U.S. Postal Service reported as a loss this past spring. That’s actually really good! In the spring of 2014 the USPS lost almost $2 billion. [Associated Press]

$350 billion

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton proposed a $350 billion student debt relief program while campaigning in New Hampshire and indicated she intended to make it a centerpiece of her campaign. [Bloomberg]

I’m at the Joint Statistical Meetings (along with @andrewflowers and @cragcrest) in Seattle through Tuesday. Hit us up if you’re going to be there!
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
10 years
The Library of Congress has acquired the print to “The Day The Clown Cried,” the Jerry Lewis movie about a clown and the Holocaust that was never intended to be seen. The Library of Congress has said it won’t screen the film for at least a decade. [Vanity Fair]

51 percent

Facebook analyzed how people indicate they find something funny, and the global word for laughter on the Web is “haha.” 51.4 percent used those four letters, substantially more than the 1.3 percent who used “lol.” [CNET]

57 percent
That’s the percent of teens who say they’ve met a friend on the Internet. More than half of that group say they’ve done it more than five times. [Pew Research Center]


1,430 people
The number of people who signed up to hunt bears in Florida last week. The ursine population in the entire state is said to be “more than 3,000 bears,” and only 320 are allowed to be killed in a year. That’s quite a hunter-to-bear ratio. [The Orlando Sentinel]

9,350 years 
A monolith has been found near Sicily in the Mediterranean Sea, and it’s nearly 10,000 years old. I assume this means I was totally right about this Atlantis thing the whole time. [news.com.au]

$38,500

The rights to “Do The Bartman,” a novelty song from the early era of “The Simpsons,” have been purchased for nearly $40,000. Presumably the buyer was not a Cubs fan. [The Guardian]

$26.2 million

That’s how much money “Fantastic Four” made in its first weekend at the box office, coming in second to the grammatically abhorrent “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation.” [Associated Press]

2.7 million
Number of honeybee colonies in 2012, an increase from the levels in 2006. Bee populations are still suffering from colony collapse disorder, but beekeepers have managed to keep the apian populations rising. [The Washington Post]

34.5 million
Unique visitors to Vine in June, which is also roughly the number of visitors to Snapchat. Vine says it serves 100 million people every month, which at six seconds per Vine means that humanity spends 19 years of its time watching looping videos — every month. [Quartz]

I’m at the Joint Statistical Meetings (along with @andrewflowers and @cragcrest) in Seattle through Tuesday. Hit us up if you’re going to be there!
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 arrests
Three people were arrested this week after allegedly planning to kill soldiers involved in the Jade Helm military exercises, the FBI said. Authorities said the three had stockpiled weapons and the components of an explosive, with a plan to booby trap some land in South Carolina. [MySanAntonio]


$9.99
Hoping to copy Netflix’s success with subscription streaming, prurient empire Pornhub announced plans for a premium streaming pornography service. Convincing people to pay for pornography on the Internet? I’ve heard a lot of crazy business models in this bold new age of startups, but color me skeptical here. [Venturebeat]

10 percent

Early reviews are not looking great for “Fantastic Four,” which opens this weekend and has a 10 percent rating on Rotten Tomatoes. The director, Josh Trank, sent out a since-deleted tweet acknowledging the disappointing reviews and hinting that somewhere a cut of the movie exists that is indeed fantastic but that we will probably never see. Perhaps there was too much meddling from the Interdimensional Council of Reeds. Maybe this movie actually stars a bunch of Skrull impersonators of the Four. Or maybe we have somehow made Franklin Richards angry. Who can say? Here’s a little nugget from the room of 100 ideas: Stop making movies where Dr. Doom sucks — seriously, how do you screw up a character that rad? All hope lies in Doom. [The Daily Beast]

10 questions

Last night the top 10 candidates for the Republican presidential nomination met on a stage in Cleveland to debate. It was awesome. Surprisingly, the debate focused a lot more on foreign policy than economics, with 10 questions in total asked about foreign policy compared to six on the economy. In fairness, four questions were asked about God — regrettably nobody took a particularly bold stance there. [FiveThirtyEight]

30 minutes
North Korea is creating its own timezone by dropping clocks back 30 minutes in what will be called “Pyongyang time,” effective Aug. 15. So if you do a lot of business in North Korea, be sure to make a note. [The New York Times]

35 years
A Stradivarius violin stolen 35 years ago from Roman Totenberg, the father of NPR reporter Nina Totenberg, has been recovered. It’s worth millions. [Paste Magazine]

58 percent
At last night’s Republican debate, Chris Christie pushed to raise the retirement age for Social Security. This proposal is kind of a non-starter among the party’s base, though, as 58 percent of Republicans older than 50 oppose raising the retirement age. [FiveThirtyEight]

84 percent

SeaWorld is still reeling from “Blackfish,” the documentary that raised questions about its treatment of animals, with an 84 percent drop in profits in the second quarter compared to the year before. Attendance dropped by 100,000 people, about 1.5 percent. [The Guardian]

1 million gallons
A million gallons of mine waste contaminated a river in Colorado. At this point the universe is just trying to spite California. [Time]

$181 million
The Coast Guard captured a Sheen’s-worth of cocaine — roughly 12,000 pounds — in the Pacific Ocean that was being transported in a homemade submarine. The cocaine is worth about $181 million. [CNN]

I’m going to the Joint Statistical Meetings (along with @andrewflowers and @cragcrest) in Seattle this weekend through Tuesday. Hit us up if you’re going to be be there!
Have a great weekend, and if you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 percent 

Public Policy Polling ran a poll in Minnesota and we learned a bunch of stuff about an election that is months away. Whatever. Most importantly, they got favorability ratings for “Deez Nuts,” which is the best use of polling technology that I can think of. About 89 percent of respondents had no opinion about Deez Nuts (who filed as an independent candidate for president), while 3 percent had a favorable opinion and 8 percent had an unfavorable opinion. [Public Policy Polling]



22 percent
People are not vaccinating their kids against HPV, despite a safe and available shot that will keep them from getting some cancers later in life. Feels like a no-brainer, people. Only 22 percent of boys and 40 percent of girls 13 to 17 have been fully vaccinated against HPV. [FiveThirtyEight]

24 states
Since Aug. 9 of last year, when a police officer shot and killed Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, there have been at least 984 protests in America over police treatment of black Americans, with 24 states passing police department reforms. [Samuel Sinyangwe]

29 percent
The Treasury is planning to add a new face to the $10 bill, and a McClatchy-Marist poll found that Eleanor Roosevelt is the preferred candidate of 29 percent of Americans. [McClatchyDC]

30.2 percent
The Media Diversity and Social Change Initiative’s new report has found that from 2007 to 2014 only 30.2 percent of speaking characters in the top 700 grossing films were female. Needless to say, this is a rather poor reflection of the gender breakdown of reality. I wrote about these folks last year, if you want more detail about their research. [USC Annenberg]

56 percent
Percentage of Americans who think the use of atomic bombs in Japan in 1945 was justified, down from 63 percent in 1991. [Pew Research Center]

69 percent

According to a new study of women, birth control pills were found to have a significant effect on mitigating the risk of endometrial cancer. The cancer risk for women who had used the pill was 69 percent of that of women who had not. [Forbes]

$1,300
A human monster stole about $1,300 worth of ice cream from a parked ice cream truck in Brooklyn in New York City. The gutless thief focused his cowardly raid on the Good Humor treats, which everyone knows are the good ones. Also, he got about $2,200 in cash, but it’s the ice cream that’s infuriating: How could you possibly eat that much? It’s like greed and gluttony all tied up in one crime. [GrubStreet]

$24 million
That’s the cost to TLC of canceling “19 Kids and Counting,” the reality show profiling the Duggar family. The show was canceled earlier this year after it was revealed that son Josh Duggar had molested several young girls. [The Hollywood Reporter]

1.2 billion
Britons took an estimated 1.2 billion selfies in 2014. I have nothing to add here. [The Guardian]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
$0
The Mississippi state primaries were Tuesday. Incumbent Gov. Phil Bryant won the Republican field handily, but the state Democratic Party did not exactly recruit a competitive slate: They’re going to get shellacked in the general no matter what. But! The victor in the Mississippi Democratic gubernatorial primary was trucker Robert Gray — who has never held elected office, was too busy to vote, and also reported raising zero dollars for his campaign. [The Clarion-Ledger, The Associated Press]

7 percent
Pennsylvania spends more than 7 percent of its annual state budget on its corrections system, about $2 billion. The state is considering basing punishments on the likelihood that an individual will commit more crimes in the future. Raises a lot of questions, right? [FiveThirtyEight]

8 percent

It’s been a year since CVS announced that it would stop selling cigarettes — a move that would involve short-term business lost with the hope of longer-term business gained — but details on those losses have finally appeared, and they’re not pretty. General merchandise sales — where cigarettes used to be — were down 8 percent at the drug store last quarter, and the company claimed that sales would have been flat if not for the change. [KMBC]

$3,800
The Australian speaker of the lower house resigned amid what’s being described as “Choppergate,” an incident where Bronwyn Bishop used government funds to pay for helicopter trips despite a fiscally conservative policy portfolio. As an American, I find this surprising for two reasons, the first being that a helicopter trip for a few grand could never tank a member of Congress, and the second being since when did other countries start adding “gate” to the end of their scandals? That’s our thing! [The Economist]

25,000
That’s the number of lampposts in San Francisco. The city’s issue is that the lampposts are decaying: On Monday, a urine-degraded lamppost fell on a car, according to city officials. Lot to digest in that sentence, I know, but apparently urine degrades lampposts (but not fire hydrants, oddly enough, according to the city) and also this is such a problem in San Francisco that the sheer volume of urine is enough to topple a metal light pole. The budget for replacing light poles increased from $500,000 to $5 million last year alone, I presume because of an ocean of pee coursing through city streets. [SFGate]

$1 million
Gaming companies are looking at the growing e-sports phenomenon and seeing a way to extend the playable life of multiplayer games. Microsoft announced that for the forthcoming “Halo 5: Guardians,” it will launch the Halo World Championship with prizes worth $1 million. The gamble is that the interest built up by watching competitive Halo will drive players to the fifth game. [CNET]

$27.4 million
A Picasso that was considered a national treasure in Spain, “Head of a Young Woman,” was intercepted by French customs while being smuggled out of the country. Hey, what’s Nic Cage been up to lately? [The Associated Press]

$3 billion or more

Major League Baseball is actually an integral part of streaming video online — MLB Advanced Media streams video for, in addition to baseball, the WWE, HBO and ESPN* — and the company indicated that after a board vote it would spin off the tech operations of Advanced Media into its own company. BAM Tech would be worth upwards of $3 billion. The company also announced that it inked a deal with the NHL to stream hockey games, too. [Recode]
*Standard disclosure, ESPN owns FiveThirtyEight, which is where I work.



9 billion gallons
That’s how much water lawns consume every day nationwide. About 1.9 percent of the lower 48’s land area is consumed by lawns. Seems pointless. [The Washington Post]

$1.3 trillion
The S&P 500 may be up since June of last year, but oil has taken a substantial hit in that time. Energy companies saw $1.3 trillion of their value wiped out in the crash of crude oil’s price to below $50 a barrel. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
12 percent
“California is on fire” is kind of “dog bites man” this time of year, but one fire that covers about 94 square miles is currently only 12 percent contained. The Rocky fire has forced the evacuation of more than 13,000 people. [The Guardian]

27.24 percent interest rate
National Journal reports that GOP presidential candidate and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has two credit-card debts of more than $10,000 each. On one account, Walker owes between $10,000 and $15,000 at a 27.24 percent interest rate, which seems like the rate you’d get from Frank out back the racetrack rather than Barclays. Also, fair warning that if you ever run for president people will be able to learn way too much about your financial life. [National Journal]

40-foot-tall minion
As if “Minions” weren’t already ruining your Facebook news feed, a 40-foot-tall balloon of one of the creatures got loose and flew into traffic in north Dublin on Monday, causing congestion. [The Independent]

720 years
The last time that the Welsh town of Conwy had an official jester appointed was in about 1295, 720 years ago, when King Edward I assigned Tom le Fol to the post. Now, a resident named Russel Erwood has claimed the esteemed position to reignite the tradition. The story makes no mention of the queen showing up, but the guy did complete a few feats, so based on everything I know about the laws of Wales (zilch), I guess that’s legitimate. [Raw Story]

1,041 percent

That’s the price increase on textbooks between January 1977 and June 2015. While this is obviously terrible for students and is yet another sign that the commodification and commercialization of learning is pretty screwed up, it’s catnip for people like me who took flak for skipping grad school to work in the lucrative and sexy field of writing crap on the Internet. [NBC News]

 5,357 bottles

Law enforcement in China has confiscated 5,357 bottles of baijiu (expensive grain liquor) products from two distillers in Guangxi as part of an investigation into whether the company added Sildenafil, which is the generic name for Viagra, into their alcoholic beverages. I knew something would fill the vacuum left after they nixed full-strength Four Loko, but I worry this may be a viral marketing campaign for The League. [Reuters]



$8,500
A journalist who was arrested during protests in Ferguson, Missouri, in November settled a lawsuit against St. Louis County for $8,500 and the dropping of three charges. [The Huffington Post]

36,000 cases
Kraft has issued a recall for 36,000 cases of individually wrapped American cheese because part of the packaging might stick to the cheese and create a choking hazard. It’s worth noting that this is a problem because either (a) Americans are eating the singles with such voracity that they fail to notice that the packaging has not been fully removed from the processed cheese product, or (b) the flavor of plastic is not entirely distinguishable from the aforementioned processed cheese product. As an American who has thrown back his share of stacks of American cheese singles, I can say with authority that it’s probably a little bit of both. [CNN]

17 billion views
Facebook defines a video view as someone watching at least three seconds of a native video. This has made some content creators unhappy, as some unscrupulous news sites rip content from YouTube or other services to repost on Facebook. Of the top 1,000 most-popular vids from the first quarter of the year, 725 were re-uploads. These videos — which were not created by the entity that reposted and thus profits from them — accumulated some 17 billion views. Think of it this way: If each of those views was only three seconds, that still means humanity spent a cumulative 1,616 years and change watching reposts. [Business Insider]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


