
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
34 seconds
Ronda Rousey KO’d Bethe Correia in 34 seconds in a UFC match Saturday. I think my colleague Andrew Flowers had the right of it when he said she fights like an outlier. [Deadspin]

35 percent

A new study out of the London School of Economics found that kids in the U.K. with low cognitive ability from high-income households were 35 percent more likely to grow up to be high-income earners than high-ability kids from poor families. [Gov.uk]

36 original shows

Netflix has made a massive investment in developing original content, and it appears to finally be paying off. It’s got a roster of 36 original shows in 2015 and beyond, more than perennial juggernaut HBO with 23. [Vulture]

49.7 percent
Spam accounted for 49.7 percent of email in June, which is actually the lowest it’s been since before 2003. Hear that, Gmail? Chill out. Stop putting our awesome Significant Digits newsletter in readers’ spam folder; we’re already winning this war. [Quartz]

100 percent
The trial of a Merck and NewLink Genetics vaccine for Ebola saw a 100 percent protection rate after 10 days for more than 4,000 people immunized. That’s awesome, for one, but also a handy little stat to keep in your pocket for when your anti-vaxxer friend gets into it on Facebook somewhere down the line. [CNBC]

5,700 stores
Rite Aid, which has about 4,600 drug stores, and Food Lion, which has about 1,100 locations, are each going to begin putting Cosmopolitan magazine behind blinders to reduce children’s exposure to sexuality. Now we may never truly know the exact nature of the “Sex So Hot You’ll Need to Crank the A.C.,” but I’ve narrowed it down to some combination involving a Williams-Sonoma Kitchen Torch, Everclear, welding gloves and Icy Hot. Get at it, people. [The New York Times]

$500,000
One day after it formed, MMWP12 LLC gave half a million dollars to the New Day Independent Media Committee, a group backing Ohio Gov. John Kasich for president. Business must really be booming! Or maybe someone is trying to squirrel some pseudo-anonymous cash through an intermediary to a campaign. Or MMWP12 LLC’s business could be booming too! [The Center for Public Integrity]

$2 million
Tiger Beat, the timeless magazine that distributes photographic hagiographies of pop stars, is headed for a revamp after 17 investors dumped $2 million into rebooting the magazine. [The New York Times]

$56 million
Tom Cruise’s “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation” may have a grammatically incoherent title, but it also made a boatload of money in its first weekend at the box office, with $56 million at a little less than 4,000 theaters. Classic Tom. [Variety]

$51 billion
After a funding round led by Microsoft and Bennett Coleman & Co., Uber’s valuation is now nearly $51 billion. That seems like a big, random-ish number that means nothing to the average person — welcome to tech valuations! — but here’s the big thing: for perspective on this, Uber hit a $51 billion valuation about two years faster than Facebook did. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2nd birthday
Right down to the wire, the Best Story Of July finally dropped: A toddler in Louisiana was so obsessed with the commercials for a local personal injury lawyer named Morris Bart that “Morris” and “Bart” were his second and third words. This kid is into Morris Bart. So when he turned 2, rather than a “Spider-Man” theme or whatever, his parents threw him a party with the theme of local personal injury lawyer Morris Bart. The kid loved it. The party made it into the The Wall Street Journal. This story is amazing. [The Acadiana Advocate]

30 percent

That’s the percentage of Republican voters who said they definitely did not support Donald Trump in his bid for the party’s presidential nomination, according to a Quinnipiac poll. [WHOtv]

95 percent
Percentage of New York residents surveyed who said they had never taken some action to prevent a car theft after hearing a car alarm go off. Spurring people to action is ostensibly the point of car alarms. But the alarms have somewhere between a 95 percent and 99 percent false-positive rate, so they’re pretty much pointless. [Priceonomics]

$240 per day
Big government is trying to bring down a hardworking business yet again: Two children (ages 8 and 10) from Cornwall, in England, were threatened with a $240 daily fine after selling worms on their front porch. (I am totally going to assume selling worms is some longstanding entrepreneurial endeavor for children in the United Kingdom.) [CFRA]

1,000 petaflops
While the Flop Race doesn’t have quite the same ring as the Space Race, an executive order from President Obama has begun an initiative to develop the first exaflop computer. “Flops” are a way to measure computing speed using the number of floating point operations — a type of arithmetic problem — a computer can perform per second. Right now, the best supercomputer on the planet is the 33.86 petaflop Tianhe-2 in China. An exaflop is about 1,000 petaflops, so it’s a lofty goal. [Wired]

16,000 graduates
Coding academies unaffiliated with traditional higher-ed computer science departments will see an estimated 16,000 programmers graduate this year. That’s about a third of the number of U.S comp sci grads from universities and may help fuel sky-high demand for software engineers. [The New York Times]

5,066 people

The number of people — about half of them bystanders, half passengers — who have been killed in the course of U.S. police car chases since 1979. [USA Today]

$10 million
James Woods is suing an anonymous Twitter user for $10 million in a defamation suit over a tweet saying the actor was a cocaine addict. Woods disputes this. First rule of Twitter, everyone: Don’t argue with an egg. Nobody looks good after that. [The Hollywood Reporter]

$112 million
Revenue for SoulCycle in 2014. The company behind the glorified spin class filed documents for an IPO. [Business Insider]

$225.8 million
Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May, who previously hosted “Top Gear” for the BBC, have signed on with Amazon to make a new show about cars. The trio’s previous show made an estimated $225.8 million for the BBC in 2014. [CNN Money]

Have a good weekend! If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.




--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4.5 percent
The U.S. unemployment rate is projected to drop to 4.5 percent by December assuming current trends hold. Then again, “assuming current trends hold” is a dangerous sentence for forecasters. [Brookings]

11.5 years
America, your cars are old: The average vehicle age in this country is 11.5 years. So suck on that, planned obsolescence! [Associated Press]

19 years
Back in 1992, researchers in China saw a weird bird. It took 19 years, but scientists finally found the bird again and confirmed it was a new species, Locustella chengi (common name: Sichuan bush warbler). I’m simplifying the process a bit there, but all you need to know is that the Sichuan bush warbler makes sounds like an insect, a party trick I’m sure will never get old. [The Guardian]

3,447 one-star reviews

As of 5 p.m. Wednesday, the dental practice of Walter Palmer had racked up 3,447 one-star reviews on Yelp. The negative ratings may have less to do with the dentist’s drill skill and more to do with the fact that the guy paid a bunch of money to shoot a beloved lion for sport. [Motherboard]

3,800 miles
A chunk of airplane wreckage washed up on the island of Réunion, east of Madagascar, and it may have come from MH370, the plane that disappeared last year. If it is, it has travelled at least 3,800 miles from the last known location of the plane. (I’d make a joke about CNN, but I just got back from vacation.) [Wired]

$75,000
Three University of Virginia graduates are suing Rolling Stone magazine and reporter Sabrina Rubin Erdely for defamation over the retracted article “A Rape on Campus.” The plaintiffs belonged to the fraternity whose members were accused in the story of raping another student. While an exact number has not been set, the plaintiffs are suing for upwards of $75,000. [The Washington Post]

$237,000 average bonus

A Turkish CEO who sold his food-delivery startup for $589 million paid the company’s 114 employees a combined $27 million, breaking down to about $237,000 each in bonuses. [CNN Money]

968 million daily active users
Facebook earnings dropped yesterday as the company reported it had 968 million daily active users, below expectations. People spend on average 46 minutes per day on the company’s suite of products, which includes Instagram. [Business Insider]

$2.9 billion
Donald Trump says his net worth exceeds $10 billion, and his recent financial disclosure filing with the Federal Election Commission puts the figure at $8.7 billion. The Bloomberg Billionaires Index, which has some experience in this kind of thing, puts it closer to $2.9 billion. I’m sure this disagreement will elicit a reasoned, rational response from Camp Trump. [Bloomberg]

7,845,460,401 uniques

Washington’s football team reported that it got 7,845,460,401 unique visitors for its print and online coverage of its 2014 training camp. Quick check: There are slightly fewer people on Earth. Washington is either working from a particularly innovative perspective on the meaning of “unique visitor” or — and this is just a working theory — a professional sports team might be overstating figures in order to extract concessions from a host city. [The Washington Post]

I’m back! Huge thanks to Oliver Roeder for covering for me as I developed a profound sunburn. Be sure to follow him @Ollie, he’s the best. If you see a significant digit in the wild, be sure to tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 coach
That’s the number of female coaches in the NFL after Jen Welter was hired by the Arizona Cardinals as an assistant coaching intern. The NBA also has one female assistant coach, while MLB and MLS have no female coaches. As my colleague Leah Libresco tweeted: “We were going to graph the share of female coaches in men’s sports, but the bars were too small to see.” [FiveThirtyEight]

4 jokes

Conan O’Brien is being sued for stealing jokes from Twitter. A man who says he was a longtime writer for Jay Leno claims an airline joke (wow, I’m laughing already) as well as jokes about Tom Brady, Caitlyn Jenner and the Washington Monument were pilfered from his feed and used on O’Brien’s show. Conan’s production company believes the suit is without merit. Coco, I’m gonna do you a solid: I’m tweeting a joke right now, just for you. I waive all rights, please feel free to use it in tonight’s monologue. [The Hollywood Reporter]

8 farms
I’ve got my tent firmly pitched in the pro-cilantro camp, but my allegiance is being tested. The FDA has banned some cilantro imported from Mexico after investigators discovered “human feces and toilet paper in and around growing fields.” Eight of the 11 farms and packing houses investigated in the Mexican state of Puebla had “objectionable conditions” and five were linked to hundreds of outbreaks in the U.S. of cyclosporiasis. [CNN]

15 percent
Share of Americans who do not use the Internet. They must be so happy. [Pew Research Center]

63.5 percent
Homeownership in the U.S. is at a 48-year low. The seasonally adjusted homeownership rate is now 63.5 percent, down from pre-recession highs of above 69 percent. Both the homeowner and rental vacancy rates, however, have also fallen. This means a tight housing market — to which I can anecdotally attest, having recently hunted for an apartment — and a possible boon to the economy in ensuing construction. [The Wall Street Journal]

200 to 400 feet
Amazon has proposed that some prime (get it?) airspace, from 200 to 400 feet off the ground, be reserved for high-speed drones. The company has visions of one day delivering its packages by drone. [The Guardian]

10,000 texts

Tom Brady’s four-game “Deflate-gate” suspension has been upheld by the NFL. In a statement on the decision, the league said Brady had destroyed his cellphone, despite investigators’ requests to access it. The phone had been used to exchange 10,000 text messages over four months — or just more than 80 texts a day. Even still, Brady’s got nothing on the 18 to 24 set — those kids send and receive more than 125 texts a day! [The Washington Post]

$50,000 in bunny care
After 103 rabbits were seized from her home, a Brooklyn woman has been ordered to pay $50,000 for their care. The bunnies had become celebrities in their neighborhood. [New York Post]

$2 million a year
You have to pay about $1,500 to license the song “Happy Birthday.” Yeah, that “Happy Birthday.” Two filmmakers upset by that fact have uncovered evidence that they say negates Warner/Chappell Music’s 1935 copyright and puts the song in the public domain. The copyright has at some points netted its owners about $2 million a year. [Ars Technica]

304 million core users

Twitter’s stock price slumped more than 11 percent Tuesday, after slower than expected growth in its average monthly users. The company said it now has 304 million “core users.” That’s up from 302 million last quarter, but the growth was the slowest since the company went public. [Reuters]

Don’t worry, Walt Hickey’s return is nigh. But today, for those of you who a) use the Internet and b) are on Twitter, if the significance of a digit moves you, please tweet it to me @Ollie. And have a super Wednesday!
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
8.5 percent
Chinese stocks took a big hit Monday as two major indices fell more than 8 percent. Some blame the drop on “malicious” short selling. Regulators vowed to deal sternly with anyone engaging in such trading behavior, “in Beijing’s latest attempt to stave off a full-blown market crash.” [Reuters]

35 women
New York magazine published the stories of 35 women who have come forward publicly to accuse Bill Cosby of rape or sexual assault, and agreed to be interviewed and photographed. In total, 46 women have now accused Cosby publicly. “The group, at present, ranges in age from early 20s to 80 and includes supermodels … alongside waitresses and Playboy bunnies and journalists and a host of women who formerly worked in show business,” wrote Noreen Malone and Amanda Demme. [New York]

40 percent
The share of adults on the face of the Earth who have never heard of climate change. Most of them serve in Congress. But seriously, folks, this suggests to researchers the importance of education, and understanding the country- and culture-specific nature of how climate change is perceived. [The Washington Post]

300 trucks
French farmers turned away 300 trucks containing meat and dairy products at the border with Germany. The farmers are angry about the low prices for their own produce, and sought to scuttle the would-be imports. Farmers also blocked food trucks on the Spanish border the day before. [AP]

1,000 signatories
True fact: Visionary humans Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking have taken action to save the world from killer robots. I didn’t really know killer robots were an actual thing until just this moment, but OK, I feel safe-ish knowing they’re on it. So what action did Musk and Hawking take to protect us from a hellish revolution of autonomous weapons? They, along with 1,000 others, signed an open letter that will be presented at a conference. Hmm. Well, on behalf of humankind, uh, thanks? [ABC News]

2,000 bags
New York City authorities seized 2,000 bags of synthetic marijuana from delis in East Harlem last week, after seizing 8,000 bags of the substance in a raid early this month. Synthetic marijuana — also called spice — sells for as little as $2 a packet, and is apparently difficult to ban because of always-shifting chemical formulae used in its manufacture. Drugs of this type, however, have been linked to spikes in overdoses and emergency room visits in New York City and elsewhere. [Gothamist]

50,000 mariners
The Thai fishing fleet, which fills much of the American demand for cheap fish, has an annual labor shortage of around 50,000 mariners. Much of that shortage is filled by migrants from Cambodia and Myanmar, who “become so-called sea slaves in floating labor camps.” [The New York Times]

$55,000

A hunter bribed guides $55,000 so he could kill a lion in Zimbabwe. The lion, named Cecil, was a major attraction at Hwange National Park. It was shot with a crossbow and survived, but was later shot with a rifle, beheaded and skinned. And as if this story wasn’t too goddamn sad already, Cecil’s six cubs will now be killed, since another male lion won’t abide them in the pride. [BBC]

$100 million a day

The Northeast Corridor, the rail sector reaching from Boston to Washington, D.C., and carrying 750,000 passengers a day, is crumbling. Amtrak owns a majority of the rail infrastructure along the corridor, and President Obama has called for a $1 billion increase in the rail service’s subsidy next year, while House Republicans passed a bill last month to trim it by $250 million. If the Northeast Corridor were shut down for just one day, according to one report, it would cost the country $100 million. [The New York Times]

$4 billion

LaGuardia Airport, a well-known dumpster fire in Queens, is getting a facelift. Well, more like a face transplant. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Vice President Joe Biden — who once compared the airport to “some Third World Country” — unveiled the plan to demolish LaGuardia’s existing buildings and replace them with a big, new terminal. The plan’s first phase is slated to cost $4 billion. The new parts will open to passengers in 2019, and hey, I bet it’ll be really fun when it’s under construction! [AP]

The great Walt Hickey is on a beach somewhere, so if a digit strikes you as particularly significant, please tweet it to me @Ollie. And have a wonderful Tuesday!
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 titles
Chris Froome has joined the Tour de France elite, clinching his second victory on Sunday in Paris. Now only 20 men — excluding Lance Armstrong, whose seven titles have been officially stripped — have won the general classification on multiple Tours. Froome, a Kenya-born Brit, also took the much-cooler-sounding King of the Mountains honor as the event’s best climber. He was only the sixth rider to take both crowns in one year. [The Guardian]

15 years
Chinese gamers, lament: I’m about to destroy you in “Halo.” China just lifted its 15-year ban on video game consoles, allowing companies like Microsoft, Nintendo and Sony to hawk their wares across the country — one of “the world’s largest videogame markets.” [The Wall Street Journal]

15 percent
Tourism in Cuba has jumped, up 15 percent in the first five months of this year. After a normalization of diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba, some worry that Cuba may eventually lose its “1950s nostalgia” and become just another tourist trap. As long as any radical transformation does not eliminate mojitos, I would still like to visit. [NPR]

18 percent
Donald Trump, The World’s Greatest Troll, is trolling right along. Trump is drawing 18 percent support among Republicans, according to a recent CNN/ORC poll. This puts him atop the expansive field of Republican presidential hopefuls nationally, besting Jeb Bush’s 15 percent. Trump also leads in New Hampshire — and is a close second to Scott Walker in Iowa — according to recent NBC News/Marist polling. Chicken Little could not be reached for comment. [CNN]

$25 gift card
Nike will pay up to $2.4 million per a settlement in a lawsuit related to its FuelBand. (Apple was also named as a defendant, but the company bears no liability.) Beneficiaries of the class action settlement can apply for $15 cold, hard cash, or a $25 Nike gift card. According to the plaintiffs, the product’s ability to accurately measure physical activity, like steps taken and calories burned, was overblown. [AppleInsider]

45 2/3 innings
On Sunday, a hapless Zack Greinke gave up a run to a pitcher (a pitcher!) on one of the worst offensive teams in the league to end his pathetic 45 2/3-inning scoreless streak. The Mets’ Jacob deGrom notched an RBI (just his second of the year) on a fielder’s choice in the bottom of the third against the Dodgers. Greinke’s was only the fourth-longest such streak in the expansion era. The Dodgers went on to lose in 10 innings. [USA Today]

51 million posts
Lost your phone? You’re not alone. In an average month, “more than 51 million posts, comments, likes and shares are related to users discussing lost phones,” according to Facebook. Amazingly, though, over 75 percent of posts about lost phones are made from other mobile devices. [Adweek]

$105 million

Fiat Chrysler has been fined a record $105 million, as the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration cracks down on safety violations. Chrysler reportedly mishandled nearly two dozen recalls of its automobiles. In one high-profile incident, Jeep Grand Cherokee models from 1993 to 2007 were shown to be “prone to deadly fires.” More than 50 deaths have been linked to that problem. [CNN Money]

$200 million
The Venezuelan brewing industry is $200 million in debt to suppliers, and the country could stop brewing beer by August. Strict currency controls have made crucial beer-related imports such as barley and malt scarce. Supplies of toilet paper and shampoo have reportedly also been scant. A shortage of beer, however, would clearly be much, much worse. [Fusion]

$49 billion
AT&T and DirecTV are merging. The deal — worth $49 billion — was approved by the FCC on Friday. If you’re having déjà vu, it may be because of Comcast’s $45 billion bid for Time Warner Cable, which fell apart in April. I’d like to apologize in advance to all Significant Digits readers for their inevitable customer service-induced stress dreams. This column will return tomorrow, sometime between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. [Variety]

My esteemed colleague Walt Hickey is off working on his tan, so if you see a digit that tickles your significance bone, please tweet it to me @Ollie.
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And happy Monday!



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
$4.50
A bill in the House of Representatives would, among other things, cap airline bag fees at $4.50. Will this actually happen? I’m dubious. Is it remarkable trolling of the airlines? Absolutely, and I want Congress to do stuff like this more often. Kudos Rep. John Mica. [MSN]

18-year-old drivers
Congress is also considering legislation, backed by the trucking industry, that would allow 18-year-olds to drive 18-wheelers. Forty-eight states already allow this, but only within state lines. I am weighing my worry about Snapchatting truckers against my desire to have an Amazon Prime package at my doorstep even faster, and I’m not going to lie: I think I’m OK with this. [Bloomberg Politics]

40 minutes

The average YouTube video watching session on mobile phones is up to 40 minutes — just one reason YouTube’s mobile revenue has doubled year-over-year. [Business Insider]

92 percent
In an international survey looking at economic optimism (and pessimism), Nigerians are the most optimistic about their nation’s financial situation, with 92 percent of those surveyed believing their economy will improve. [Bloomberg]

4,175 planets
NASA — basically the MVP of the U.S. government at this point — identified 500 new exoplanets, or planets around other stars. One is Earth-like, but nobody reading this will ever be alive to see it up close; it’s 1,400 light years away. The total number of planets identified by the Kepler telescope is now 4,175. [Wired]

$9 million
Putting butter in your coffee is really tasty, but not ideally a summer thing if you ask me. Still, the folks behind Bulletproof Coffee, a company that sells buttered coffee online, raised $9 million from VCs to start a brick-and-mortar operation. [Fortune]

5 million gamers
That’s the number of people registered in the Electronic Sports League (ESL), a governing body for e-sports that announced Thursday it will begin testing for performance enhancing drugs, specifically Mountain Dew Code Red. I’m joking; the ESL wants to find dopers who are on Adderall. I’m looking forward to pained, handwringing meditations from future moralizing e-sports columnists on the disastrous Adderall era of League of Legends, and how they’re withholding their Hall of Fame vote for that promising Mid-laner who was suspected of doping with his little brother’s Concerta. In the end, all sports — even non-sports — are the same. [Associated Press]

$1.31 billion
Nikkei will buy the Financial Times from Pearson for $1.31 billion. I assume the technology behind pink newspaper was a crucial element of the deal. [MarketWatch]

$4.8 billion
Levi’s revenues are down to about $4.8 billion from about $7 billion two decades ago. The culprit: yoga pants. [Bloomberg]

$30 billion
Amazon announced strong quarterly earning on Thursday, leading to a $30 billion rise in the company’s market value. That makes Amazon more valuable than Wal-Mart, at least for the moment. [Quartz]

I’m taking a few days off early next week, so once again the wonderful Oliver Roeder will be your guide through the significant digits of the world. If you see a digit in the wild, tweet it to him at @Ollie. 
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Have a great weekend!



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5 gorings
Please stop trying to take pictures next to bison, they are wild animals with very large, very point horns. Five people have been gored by bison at Yellowstone National Park this year. It is unclear how many “likes” their pictures got on Instagram, but I feel like no matter the answer, it probably wasn’t worth getting gored by an ungulate. [National Parks Traveler]

9 cases of leprosy
Florida remains the cradle of American innovation, at least when it comes to the resurgence of generally obsolete infections that can result in disfiguring skin conditions. Armadillos are considered responsible for nine cases of leprosy in the Sunshine State. [The Daily Beast]

10:30 a.m.
The day is currently divided into two halves: 10:30 or later, a grim time of misery and toil; and the time before 10:30 a.m., when you can get breakfast at McDonald’s. According to a memo obtained by the Wall Street Journal, though, the bleakness of post-10:30 a.m. life may soon end, as McDonald’s is considering making all-day breakfast available nationwide after trials in San Diego and Nashville. [The Wall Street Journal]

5 vacated convictions

Former Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich, who is currently serving a 14-year prison sentence after trying to sell President Obama’s senate seat, saw five of his convictions vacated by federal judges and will get a retrial on those counts. [The Hill]

30 percent
That’s the percentage of surveyed Americans who think U.S. military action against the Islamic State group (also known as ISIS or ISIL) is going at all well. [Pew Research Center]

59 percent
That’s the current approval rating of Pope Francis in the U.S., down from 74 percent in February of last year. Among U.S. Catholics, the pontiff’s approval still stands at an all-things-considered-pretty-good 71 percent, though that is down from 89 percent in 2014. It’s unclear how this will affect the Pope in his crucial bid for reelectio- Oh, wait, public opinion literally matters nothing at all for the papacy, and I have no idea why we’re even bothering to ask this stuff. Carry on. [Gallup]

60 percent
At any given time, 60 percent of people in jails around the country are waiting on trials because they can’t afford or obtain bail. [The Takeaway via @TJRaphael]

62,000 Abercrombie & Fitch employees
There’s a class action lawsuit covering 62,000 Abercrombie & Fitch employees related to claims the company forced employees to buy its banal clothing to wear at work. [The Huffington Post]

550,000 video clips
The Associated Press is dropping 550,000 archival news video clips going back to 1895 on to YouTube. The listicle aggregation economy is going to have a field day. [Variety]

27 million dressers
Following the death of two children, IKEA announced a repair program for some 27 million chests of drawers and dressers that posed a tip-over hazard. [Consumer Product Safety Commission]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
+1.58 degrees
This past June was the hottest on record, 1.58 degrees Fahrenheit hotter than the 20th century average. And if the current trend holds for the rest of the year, 2015 will be one of the hottest years ever recorded. A strong El Niño in the Pacific Ocean is getting stronger, which isn’t going to help. [Bloomberg]

3 movie studios
Sony Pictures Animation and director Anthony Leondis signed a “near seven-figure deal” for an emoji-themed comedy. Let me say that more clearly: Sony Pictures Animation paid someone about a million dollars for a movie about emoji. If that wasn’t absurd enough, know that Sony beat out two other studios in the auction for the movie. It’s been real, Western Civilization. [Deadline]

$7.75
Price of a small beer at the stadiums of the Boston Red Sox, Philadelphia Phillies and Chicago Cubs, the most expensive of the ballparks surveyed. However, a small beer in Boston is smaller than a small beer in Philly. Breaking it down by ounce, Boston definitively takes the prize as the worst ballpark to drink at, with booze costing $0.65 per ounce. Yet another reason to never go to Boston. [VinePair]

33 percent
Apple revenues rose 33 percent in the third quarter. It would be wonderful to say how much of that bump was due to the release of the Apple Watch, but the company is mum on how many watches were actually moved. [Wall Street Journal]

2 moons
As part of its Pluto flyby, NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft is also getting a closer look at some of the dwarf planet’s more offbeat moons, like the 26-mile-long, 22-mile-wide Nix and the 34-mile-long, 25-mile-wide Hydra. [The Verge]

600 visitors
Number of monthly visitors to Kisumu, Kenya, a city close to the ancestral village of U.S. President Barack Obama’s family. Obama is visiting Kenya this week, and he’s apparently considered a pretty big deal over there. [Wall Street Journal]

800 square miles

If you want to buy an 800 square mile Texas ranch that spans six counties and has upwards of 1,000 oil wells, the W.T. Waggoner Estate Ranch can be yours for the low, low price of $725 million. [Bloomberg]

1.1 million books
Sales of “Go Set a Watchman” passed 1.1 million, according to Harper Collins on Monday, making the conveniently found book the publisher’s hottest seller ever. I assume the publisher is sending a fleet of interns to Alabama to scour the property of the infirm Harper Lee, hoping to dredge up any other unpublished manuscripts squirreled away in the crawl space or backyard. [Associated Press]

65 million illegal streamers
Number of people who live outside of the United Kingdom who illicitly stream BBC shows through the network’s iPlayer, according to new research. Please don’t take my “Downton Abbey” from me, BBC, I need my stories. [The Guardian]

71.5 million square feet
There’s a Pentagon’s worth of vacant office space available in the Washington D.C. metro area. Preferences in working environments are moving away from office parks and to urban centers. If anyone has ideas on what to do with it, there’s 71.5 million square feet of space for you around Washington. [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.



--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
9.5 percent
Microsoft is giving Windows 10 away for free to current users of the operating system. Microsoft’s motivation: PC shipments were down 9.5 percent worldwide during the second quarter of this year, and only 3 percent of smartphones have a Windows operating system. [The New York Times]

56 percent
That’s the level of support for the Iran nuclear deal in the United States, according to a new ABC News/Washington Post survey. On the other hand, 64 percent of respondents in the same poll said they are “not so confident” or “not confident at all” the deal will work. [The Washington Post]

750,000 people
Need a reason to use Tinder at the airport? Current and former airline employees, and their families, get perks like being able to fly for free in empty seats! In the American Airlines program alone, there are 750,000 people who are eligible. [Bloomberg]

$10 million
Former FIFA Vice President Jeffrey Webb, after being extradited to the U.S. on corruption charges, posted a $10 million bond on Saturday. He put up the bond in the form of 10 homes, three cars, 11 luxury watches and a load of jewels. Something’s fishy with these FIFA people, I’m telling ya. [Deadspin]

37 million users
Are you on AshleyMadison.com, the online dating site designed to facilitate affairs? If so, I have some good news and some bad news. The good news: You may soon find closure in your troubled relationship. The bad news: That closure may come thanks to hackers, who stole the financial information and user database of the site’s 37 million members and are attempting to publish it. So now’s a great time to pitch a vacation to your significant other — really unplug from modern life. [Krebs on Security]

$100 million

Russian billionaire Yuri Milner kicked in $100 million to sweep space for evidence of alien life. [Wired]

$226.4 million
Since the Green Bay Packers are owned by shareholders and not a single private owner, the team’s reports are public and one of our only glimpses into how the actual business of the NFL gets done. Documents from the franchise show each team got $226.4 million from the league last year as part of revenue sharing from TV and other rights. [ESPN]

904 million
That’s the number of food delivery orders conducted online in the year ending May 2015, compared to 1.02 billion conducted over the phone. Online delivery orders will soon beat phone orders if the trends of the past five years hold. [Quartz]

$19.6 billion
The craft beer market is massive — $19.6 billion this year — and one beer, in particular, is making waves this summer. There are amazing conspiracy theories brewing around Small Town Brewery’s “Not Your Father’s Root Beer.” Namely, that Small Town Brewery is actually affiliated with the folks who bottle Smirnoff Ice and Mike’s Hard Lemonade and Four Loko. So, if true, it’s not quite a small town brewery (kind of like The Simpsons’ Legitimate Businessman’s Social Club). The fact that this is plausible proves to me that the beer market is absurd. [International Business Times]

$50 billion
Over the next 50 years, that’s the cost of a plan to make sure Louisiana’s wetlands don’t disappear into the Gulf of Mexico. The state is losing 16 square miles per year due to erosion, and a $50 billion plan from the government and industry is trying to stop that. [PRI]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me, @WaltHickey.

