
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4th season

On Thursday Fox announced the cancellation of “The Mindy Project,” but distraught fans were told nearly instantaneously that the show would be moving to Hulu. TV in 2015, where nothing can stay dead — especially a “Walking Dead” spinoff. [The Hollywood Reporter]


6.5-point favorite
Las Vegas sports books are scrambling to put a hold on New England Patriots bets after a report from the NFL said that the team probably under-inflated footballs to gain a competitive advantage. It’s currently unclear if there will be any punishment meted out to the team or quarterback Tom Brady, leading Vegas to freeze betting on New England’s first game, in which it was favored by 6.5 points against the Pittsburgh Steelers. [Bloomberg]

18 percent
Zynga, the publicly traded two-hit wonder behind Farmville and Words With Friends, is laying off 18 percent of its workforce to cut $100 million in costs. [Mashable]

45 percent
Percent of Iowa Republicans who are likely caucus-goers and have an unfavorable opinion of former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush. [The New York Times]

56 shots
Judges in France will decide whether to find a bar owner guilty of manslaughter in the death of a patron who consumed 56 shots in one night. The bar had a sign indicating a previous such record was 55 shots. The patron reportedly consumed 30 shooters in a minute. This is a good reminder that alcohol is technically poison. [The Local]

190 shops
The number of one-hour photo stores fell from 3,066 shops in 1998 to a mere 190 stores in 2013 nationwide. That makes RadioShack look like Apple and Blockbuster look like… well, still Blockbuster, actually. [Bloomberg]

1 in 285
A somewhat surprising finding out of Silicon Valley: despite being over-represented in tech employment overall, a new study found that Asian men and women were vastly underrepresented in executive leadership positions at Google, Hewlett-Packard, Intel, LinkedIn and Yahoo. The gap is largest among women: while 1 in 87 white men at those firms is in management at an executive level, only 1 in 285 Asian women are. [San Jose Mercury News]



1,469 days 

The average length of an investigation into a sexual assault at at a college or university that concluded in 2014 was 1,469 days, or more than four years. [FiveThirtyEight]


$597,429

Total amount of fines handed out by the Federal Election Commission due to infractions during the 2014 election, a new low in fines since they began to be recorded in 2001. This is all despite increasing amounts of money flowing into politics. I doubt donors seeking to purchase influence from elected officials have suddenly become awesome at only doing legal things. [New York Times]


 £5 million 
That’s how much was wagered with London-based betting house Ladbrokes on the outcome of today’s U.K. election. One estimate has £100 million riding on the election in gambling alone. The U.K. sounds awesome. [FiveThirtyEight]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
4 percent
Organizations that are hemorrhaging talent like to poke millennials with claims that they (ok, we) are incapable of staying at a workplace. But our flight is just a “young people” thing in general, regardless of generation. Every month 3 percent of working 22- to 29-year-olds change jobs. In the mid-1990s that rate was 4 percent. [FiveThirtyEight]

16 states
New York is poised to become the 16th and largest state to have a standardized bar exam. The exam makes it easier for lawyers to pass the bar in more than one state. The size and litigiousness of New Yorkers could push other states to offer the standardized exam as well. [The New York Times]


34-5

The Kansas state senate voted 34-5 to override a gubernatorial veto of a bill that institutes background checks for ride-sharing drivers and cranks up the insurance they’d need. Uber has suspended operations in the state. [Mashable]




3.6 percent
Summer is coming, and California is dry. Residents and businesses decreased water usage this March by only 3.6 percent compared to March 2014. California wants to reduce urban consumption by 25 percent. [Los Angeles Times]

60 percent
Percentage of Americans who think publishing cartoons of Muhammad is “okay.” [The Washington Post]

 $7 million
That’s the bounty placed by the State Department for info on Abd al-Rahman Mustafa al-Qaduli, a leader of ISIS. It’s the highest offered amount among four top ISIS leaders the department is seeking. [Associated Press]

$1.1 billion


The EU is looking into union claims that McDonald’s dodged 1 billion euros — about $1.1 billion — in taxes through a loophole. As a guy who is secretly really into dubious international corporate tax maneuvering lingo, I was really, really hoping to make a “McDouble Irish” or “Dutch McChicken Sandwich” joke here but authorities say they may have routed profits through Luxembourg. To my knowledge a charming name has not yet been cooked up for that particular corporate tax avoidance strategy. If this turns out to be true I suggest we call it the “Quarter £-er with kachkéis” in McDonald’s honor. [The Guardian]




 $91 billion
That’s U.S. sales of sportswear apparel. Many people are just wearing sportswear like they’re real clothes. Sales are up 9.8 percent compared to last year and 27 percent compared to 2007. [The Wall Street Journal]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (May 6, 2:40 p.m.): This post originally misstated that the EU is investigating claims that McDonald’s dodged £1 billion of taxes. The claim is that the company dodged 1 billion euros worth of taxes.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 appearance
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has offered to appear one time and one time only before a congressional committee convened to investigate the attack in Benghazi, her lawyer said. I’m going to go out on a limb here and presume CSPAN will be charging $100 to watch the fight, $90 in standard definition, one side will have repeatedly voted against gay rights in Congress, many will tune in expecting an all-out brawl, but it will be mostly be defined by defense, leaving many disappointed in the state of the sport in general. [The New York Times]

3 percent

Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina has entered the race for the Republican presidential nomination. She is polling in last place nationally among candidates tracked by Huffington Post Pollster. But hey, at least she’s at 3 percent in New Hampshire! [FiveThirtyEight]

10.6 percent
One side effect of longer prison sentences required by mandatory minimum sentencing laws is that eventually those inmates are going to get old. Providing health care for the aging and infirm in America’s prisons is becoming a larger financial burden each year as the proportion of inmates older than 55 — 10.6 percent of the population in 2014, up from 6.4 percent in 2000 — rises. [Washington Post]

30 percent drop 
McDonald’s is struggling to compete with a new variety of fast-casual competitors, and last quarter reported a 30 percent drop in profits. [Time]


39th legislator
New York State senate majority leader Dean Skelos — arrested Monday on corruption charges — is the 39th New York State legislator since 2000 to face “legal or ethical charges.” [NY Databases via Reid Wilson]

 40 percent of global trade
The Trans-Pacific Partnership — a free trade deal between 12 nations that comprise about 40 percent of global trade — is sizing up to be the biggest such deal since NAFTA. Despite the push for the deal from the president, the Democratic base is not really into the agreement. [FiveThirtyEight]


$30,000



NASA is offering an award of up to $30,000 for solutions to keep Mars-bound astronauts alive for the duration of the trip. This is considered to be a somewhat important task in any manned mission to Mars, so get cracking people. [Fusion]

$70 million

New York City Mayor Bill De Blasio is committing $70 million to low-cost broadband access in the city. [TechCrunch]



$7.02 billion
France inked a deal to sell Qatar 24 Rafale fighter jets for $7.02 billion. The birds come packaged with 100 French technicians, missiles, and training. [Reuters]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 in 50
Drugs don’t always work. Indeed, many of the top selling medications in the U.S. work for few of the people actually consuming them. Statins prescribed to cut cholesterol may only work on as few as 1 in 50 people who take them. This has prompted policymakers to invest in “precision medicine,” in which drugs are designed to work with a particular profile. [Nature]


5 days
A citywide curfew in Baltimore was finally lifted Sunday. The curfew had been in effect for five consecutive nights. [The New York Times]

35 percent


Google is sponsoring professors at Historically Black Colleges and Universities — HBCUs for short — in order to help make the technology workforce more diverse.  35 percent of black computer science graduates got their degree from HBCUs. [The Huffington Post]



 81 percent



The Onion’s satirical empire is one of those unique media organizations that is able to boast profitability. One reason is Onion Labs, which develops sponsored advertisements in the publication’s style. It’s only 3 years old but remains responsible for a whopping 81 percent of the company’s revenue. [The Atlantic]

$3,500

Elon Musk announced a new venture, Tesla Energy, that will sell home batteries that run in part on solar power. The 10kWh version of the Powerwall will sell for $3,500. [TechCrunch]

1.2 million euros
That’s the cost of buying citizenship in Malta. The nation wants to raise 2 billion euros from the arrangement, and the taxes are pretty chill there if you’re the kind of petrochemical gazillionaire or general tycoon who can pay the up-front costs. [The New York Times]



$16 million

Neurosurgeon Ben Carson announced he will join the race for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination. The “Draft Ben Carson” campaign has raised almost $16 million so far. [The Washington Post]

$187.66 million
The estimated domestic opening haul for “Avengers: Age of Ultron” this past weekend, the second-largest opening ever. The largest: the first “Avengers” movie. [Business Insider]



$1.18 billion
Amount spent by the top 31,976 donors in the 2014 elections. That group comprised 0.01 percent of the total number of donors but accounted for about 29 percent of money contributed, new research found. [The Sunlight Foundation]

 $1.3 trillion
That’s how much money left China between 2003 and 2013. The Chinese government tries to restrict how much cash can be sent outside the country, but corruption and faked invoicing schemes mean that lots of cash can still find a way out of town. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (May 4, 12:50 p.m.): This post originally misstated that 35 percent of Google’s black computer programmers graduated from HBCUs. That number applies to the entire industry, not just Google.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1st pick

With the first pick of the 2015 NFL draft, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers selected quarterback Jameis Winston of Florida State. [ESPN]

2.8 percent
U.S. wages for private-sector employees were up 2.8 percent in the 12 months through March, Nate. [Bloomberg]

6 hours
That’s the half-life of caffeine in the human body, and if you want to sleep, you should probably be aware of that. [Quartz]



15 indictments


Two civilians and 13 current and former law enforcement officers from Virginia and North Carolina were arrested by federal officials after a two-year undercover investigation called Operation Rockfish. The current and former officers are accused of protecting drug shipments on the East Coast. [ABC 11]



19 days
A Chinese company constructed a 57-story building in just 19 work days in the capital of Hunan province. Let’s hope the construction work is up to snuff. [Associated Press]



26 percent
Japan plans to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases by up to 26 percent in the next 14 years, using 2013 levels as a baseline. The U.S. — which generally sucks at this kind of thing, let’s be honest — has a target reduction of 26 percent to 28 percent from 2005 levels by 2025, so keep that in mind, I suppose. [Associated Press]

 57 percentage points
Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders has joined the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. Nationally, Sanders is polling about 57 percentage points behind front-runner Hillary Clinton. [FiveThirtyEight]

 87.6 years 
New research in The Lancet suggests that estimates for the average lifespan of those born in 2030 may have been underestimated. The paper estimates that U.K. men born in 2030 will live on average 85.7 years and women will live on average 87.6 years. [Motherboard]

5,000 feet of track
Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia, California, announced the May 23 opening of the longest hybrid roller-coaster in the world, Twisted Colossus. [KTLA]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
6 attendees

The previous record for lowest attendance at a professional baseball game, set in 1882, according to the official historian of the league. A Baltimore Orioles-Chicago White Sox game Wednesday was closed to the public because of public unrest in Baltimore, ostensibly smashing that record. [FiveThirtyEight]

16 months

Anonymous sharing app Secret is closing down after 16 months, so we’re all going to have to take our spiteful remarks about others back to Twitter accounts with egg avatars. [Medium]


16.5 mistakes per 100 words
Just when you thought Washington couldn’t be worse at anything than selecting quarterbacks, a proofreading company analyzed Internet comments to find out which NFL fan base had the worst spelling and grammar. Fans of the Detroit Lions were the best of the bunch, with only 4.2 spelling or grammar mistakes per 100 words, while fans of the Washington, D.C., area football team were the worst, with 16.5 errors per 100 words. [Wall Street Journal]

80 percent
There’s an HIV outbreak in Indiana, and it’s being fueled by intravenous drug use. A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study of the first 135 incidents found that 80 percent of those who contracted HIV were intravenous drug users and that every user had tried the painkiller Opana. [Medium]

407-105
That was the (as yet unofficial) final vote count from members of the Newspaper Guild of New York to rename their union the NewsGuild of New York. [Jim Romenesko]

1,100
Number of foreign donors that the Clinton Foundation has not disclosed, according to Canadian mining magnate Frank Giustra, a co-founder of the foundation’s Canadian affiliate. [Bloomberg]



$700,000 per episode

The streaming rights to the 180 episodes of the television show “Seinfeld” were sold to Hulu for an estimated $700,000 per episode. I’m personally thrilled for the creators Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld as the creation of the film “Bee Movie” convinced me that the latter had become desperate for cash. [Wall Street Journal]

$42 million
That’s Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer’s total compensation from last year, making her the S&P 500’s highest-paid female executive. [USA Today]

100 million kilometers

We’re getting more pictures of Pluto, the underdog champ of our solar system. The snapshots were taken April 12-18, when the New Horizons space probe was about 100 million kilometers away from the planetary body deemed far too awesome to be a planet*. [Slate]



* It’s been awhile, and I don’t really remember why Pluto was dumped, but this seems reasonable.




$138 million


Total advertising revenue of New York’s Metropolitan Transportation Authority last year. On Wednesday, the agency decided to ban political advertisements, which accounted for $1 million of that. This from an agency that just shoved a fare hike down a local lifestyle writer’s goddamn throat. [The New York Times]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
7 of 659
Last year only seven — seven! — people on Stanford University’s 659 member wait list were eventually admitted to the prestigious school. [Bloomberg]

10.7 percent
An analysis of the viewing habits of 2,500 Netflix users gives us one of the first looks inside viewership of the streaming service’s original programming. According to Luth Research, 10.7 percent of observed subscribers watched one or more episodes of “Daredevil” in the show’s first 11 days. [Quartz]

40 bags per year

New restrictions approved by the European Parliament will drastically cut back on the consumption of plastic bags in member nations. The regulations require that either no new lightweight plastic bags — the flimsy kind you get at a grocery store, say — are distributed free of charge by 2018, or that nations limit consumption to 90 bags per citizen by the end of 2019 and 40 bags per citizen by the end of 2025. [BBC]

70 percent accuracy
That’s how accurate an algorithm is at predicting Supreme Court rulings using only the words spoken in oral argument. Impressive, except if you just picked the petitioner to win every time you’d get it right 68 percent of the time. [FiveThirtyEight]



120 resident offenders

When someone is a registered sex offender, there are lots of restrictions on where they can live. One side-effect of this is that new communities of offenders in particularly remote areas — such as one in Pahokee, Florida with 120 offenders in 61 bungalows — can crop up. [GQ]




150 pages
On Wednesday the Supreme Court will hear a case about Oklahoma’s ability to execute inmates using midazolam for lethal injection. One of Oklahoma’s expert witnesses did not exactly inspire confidence when he included 150 printed pages from Drugs.com as part of his testimony. [Digg]

6,000 vessels
Lake Michigan is — for now — crystal clear, meaning that eagle-eyed observers can see shipwrecks accumulated over centuries of sail. About 6,000 vessels are estimated to be on the bottom of the Great Lakes, with about a quarter of those in Michigan waters. [Smithsonian Magazine]

7,990 square kilometers

China has eclipsed France as the nation with the second highest amount of space devoted to vineyards, behind only Spain. Sure, China’s bigger, but it’s a sign that the country is increasingly going oenophile. China’s 7,990 square kilometers account for 10.6 percent of the world’s vineyard space. [Quartz]


2 million

The number of Americans who become sick annually due to antibiotic-resistant bacteria, according to the CDC. Tyson Foods announced plans to stop using human antibiotics in chicken production by 2017. [The New York Times]

$109 million


The National Football League is dropping its inane non-profit tax exempt status. The cost to the NFL in foregone tax breaks is estimated to be roughly $109 million over the next 10 years. [Bloomberg]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
3 percent
Share of federal spending this year going toward scientific research, down from nearly 10 percent in 1968, at the height of the space race. A group of MIT scientists said Monday that the decline is threatening innovation. Clearly the innovation-industrial complex has yet again found a way to jam itself into American politics, am I right? [Reuters]

4
Number of wins by NBA teams after falling behind by three games to none in the first round of this year’s playoffs. Six of the eight best-of-seven series started out with one team winning the first three games, and three of those series remain alive, with one team — the Bucks, against the Bulls — winning twice after falling behind 3-0. [ESPN]

15 percent
Proportion of Boston residents who said in a poll that they believe Dzhokhar Tsarnaev should be executed for his role in the bombing of the 2013 Boston marathon, according to a new poll from the Boston Globe. The trial takes place in a city and state that have lower levels of support of the death penalty than does the U.S. overall. [The Boston Globe]

25 percent
National success rate of insanity defenses in felony trials. The defense of James Holmes — who killed 12 people and wounded 70 in a 2012 shooting at an Aurora, Colorado movie theater — is banking on an insanity defense to avoid prison time or the death penalty. [AP]

68


Total number of ingredients required to make the items on the Chipotle food menu. The fast casual burrito chain intends to go GMO-free, which will entail making sure every one of those 68 ingredients is not genetically modified. [The New York Times]


99.7 percent

The claimed accuracy rate of a new self-testing kit for HIV that produces results within 15 minutes and is now on sale in the U.K. [AFP]


500

As riots in Baltimore continued, the governor of Maryland said he is sending 500 state troopers to the city. Gov. Larry Hogan also is requesting up to 5,000 police officers from neighboring areas, and he activated the Maryland National Guard. The unrest began on the day of the funeral and memorial service for Freddie Gray, a man whose spine was broken while in police custody earlier this month and who died on April 19. [The Baltimore Sun]

16,000
The approximate number of truck drivers who service the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. Several hundred drivers staged a walk off Monday, with what appeared to be minimal impact on international trade. Some of the port’s drivers are engaged in an ongoing dispute with shipping companies to be classified as employees rather than independent contractors. [AP]




More than 30,000

A mile-wide tornado knocked out power for more than 30,000 people in north-central Texas. [NBC News]




44,828

First rule of not getting your car stolen: Do not leave your keys in your car. Having watched my share of action movies, I assumed people understood that leaving their keys above the visor was the best way to get their car lifted by a protagonist. Not the case! Thefts where the keys were left within the vehicle rose 14 percent in 2014 from two years earlier, to 44,828. [Bloomberg]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5 high schools

The Carroll County school system in Georgia will begin randomly drug-testing students in the system’s five high schools at the rate of about 80 per month. [WSB-TV]


At least 10 instances

NBC’s internal investigation has turned up at least 10 instances of embellishment or exaggeration by anchor Brian Williams, according to a CNN report. Williams is currently serving a six-month suspension from NBC News after questions were raised about his retellings of an incident that took place during the Iraq War. [CNN]



28 campuses
The for-profit Corinthian Colleges announced that it is shutting down its 28 remaining campuses. The company has been accused by the U.S. Department of Education and the California attorney general of inflating student job-placement figures. [Los Angeles Times]

40 percent
Only about 40 percent of 2010 law school graduates are working at law firms, down from 60 percent of the class of 2000, according to a new study. [The New York Times]

 1,500 people

Approximate population of Mount Everest’s base camp at peak times each year. The base camp was hit with an avalanche after the earthquake in Nepal over the weekend, and those stranded on the mountain are in an increasingly perilous position. [The Washington Post]




$25 million
Amount transferred from the Clinton Giustra Enterprise Partnership, a charity founded by a Canadian mining businessman, to the Clinton Foundation. [The Washington Post]

$41,797,550.16

How much one woman was told she won from a video penny slot machine in 2011. It was a glitch — she only won $1.85. The woman sued — and lost, because the machine’s maximum output is only supposed to be $10,000. The house always wins. [Ars Technica]

$1.08 billion

The Romance Writers of America’s estimate of how much the genre made in 2013. The genre is unique in the industry — fundamentally meritocratic (fans regularly become writers themselves) and a huge moneymaker for a beleaguered printing business. [Maclean’s]

About $4 billion

How much cash was squirreled away in the Federal Reserve’s Cold War bunker in the 1970s, hopefully enough to get the economy going again after the big boom. [Gizmodo]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.










--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5 ejections

Apparently not realizing that NHL teams were still playing, the Kansas City Royals and Chicago White Sox sought to appease North American sports fans’ desire for timid shoving and desecration of the “spirit of the game” (or some crap like that) by having a good old-fashioned bench-clearing brawl. [NBC Sports]



$20.26

Good news: A deal between Chipotle Mexican Grill and the Postmates delivery service mean that, yeah, you can now finally get a Chipotle burrito delivered. Bad news: When a reporter guinea pigged the process, he found that his $8.27 wrap would end up costing $20.26 with delivery and service fees. The future is oh so close, friends, but most of us won’t be able to afford it. [Re/code]

37.9 percent

Proportion of scripted shows on network television since last fall with at least one cast member of Asian descent. [Fusion]

70 times greater


The seismicity rate in Oklahoma was 70 times greater in 2013 than the background rate before 2008, state officials said. Earthquake frequency increased in regions where hydraulic fracturing is used to extract oil and gas. Hear that, people? Humans can maybe make earthquakes happen. Nobody tell, like, Lex Luthor, OK? [Los Angeles Times]


$10,973.14
Average secondary market price, as of Thursday, for a ticket to the Mayweather-Pacquiao fight in Las Vegas next Saturday, higher than the average price of a Super Bowl ticket. [Forbes]


70,000 yuan
That’s about $11,300, the cost of a fine to a performance troupe in China laid down by the nation’s Ministry of Culture. The group was paid to send six erotic dancers to perform at a funeral service, a popular party theme for laying lost loved ones to rest in areas where a well-attended funeral means good fortune in whatever comes next. The shows cost $322 each. [The Wall Street Journal]

$75,000

The University of Alabama at Birmingham announced last year it planned to shutter its football program, along with rifle and bowling, due to financial difficulties. But a new report found that the school was making money off the three programs, a net of about $75,000 in the 2013-2014 school year. [ESPN]


$972,814
Venture capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers is seeking that much from former employee and Reddit interim CEO Ellen Pao as compensation for legal costs after she lost a gender discrimination lawsuit against Kleiner Perkins. [The Wall Street Journal]

$500 million
Approximate valuation of GoFundMe, the fundraising website preferred by cancer patients, struggling families and anti-gay-marriage pizzeria owners across the nation, after a recent round of venture capital funding. [TechCrunch]

$2.5 billion

Deutsche Bank was fined $2.5 billion by regulators Thursday for its role in the Libor manipulation scandal. Employees were not exactly being masters of deception when it came to putting their thumbs on the scale for the international lending rate, as hilariously blunt chat transcripts released show. [Bloomberg]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








