
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1-6
After starting the season 1-6, the Detroit Lions fired offensive coordinator Joe Lombardi and promoted quarterbacks coach Jim Bob Cooter, which is a real name of a real person, to OC. [CBS Sports]

18 percent
The percentage of Kansas residents who said they were “very” or “somewhat” satisfied with Gov. Sam Brownback in a new statewide survey. That’s a very low approval rating of a GOP governor in a very red state. President Obama got higher ratings in the survey than Brownback. [The Kansas City Star]

25th album
David Bowie’s 25th studio album, “Blackstar,” is scheduled to drop on the singer’s 69th birthday, in January. [Rolling Stone]

50 grams
A new study boldly claims that consuming an additional 50 grams of processed meat per day increases the (already rather low) risk of colorectal cancer by 18 percent. But screw it: I’m willing to roll those dice. [Bloomberg]

10,000 guns
A man arrested on drug-trafficking charges in South Carolina was found to be in possession of as many as 10,000 stolen guns, according to police. That is a big enough arsenal to arm every man who fought under George Washington in the Battle of Brooklyn, the largest battle of the Revolutionary War. [New York Daily News]

11,000 patients
The largest clinical study ever is kicking off in the United Kingdom. Researchers will follow 11,000 patients over 12 years to try to find out how aspirin affects different types of cancer. I look forward to learning the results at the end of Donald Trump’s third term. [Motherboard]

127,000
The number of Christian missionaries the United States sent out to the rest of the world in 2010, by far the most of any nation. The International Mission Board, associated with the Southern Baptist Convention, is scaling back its efforts because of funding problems. [Wall Street Journal]

2.36 million 
The average number of viewers per minute of Sunday’s Yahoo-streamed NFL game between the Buffalo Bills and Jacksonville Jaguars. While that’s not up to television viewership levels enjoyed by most afternoon and late games, it’s still a huge number for an Internet stream. [CNN Money]

$100 million
The estimated amount that Microsoft spent developing “Halo 5,” which dropped last night at midnight. Usually I’m the only one up at midnight in my apartment as my roommates are adults who have self-control with their bed times and sleep schedules and I am not, but they were nonetheless up to mainline the game as soon as it became available and report good things. [USA Today]

$26.5 billion
The size of the market for financial data. The IntercontinentalExchange, which owns the New York Stock Exchange, announced that it will buy the Interactive Data Corp., a financial data company that controls roughly 3.5 percent of that market. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
35 percent 
The percentage of people who have played in an NHL game this year who were born after Jaromir Jagr made his debut in the league on Oct. 5, 1990. [CBS Sports]

70 percent
A comedian and former television star has won the Guatemalan presidential election. With 92 percent of ballots counted, Jimmy Morales had 70 percent of the vote. This is a good story to send to your friend who is disconcertingly into Donald Trump but doesn’t think he could win it all. [Wall Street Journal]

165 mph
Estimated wind speed of Hurricane Patricia when it slammed into Mexico on Friday. The storm was only the eighth recorded hurricane to make landfall in the U.S. or Mexico at Category 5 strength. [FiveThirtyEight]

295 bears
Florida’s controversial bear hunt ended after two days and the killing of 295 bears. More than 3,200 people bought permits to participate — that’s about the same number as the state’s estimated black bear population. The idea of thousands of armed Floridians going into battle with thousands of bears is both horrifying and amazing. [Associated Press]

150,000 alpacas
The alpaca bubble has burst, with farmers wiped out in the price crash practically giving the animals away. Because of breeding programs, U.S. supply has swollen to about 150,000 alpacas, while demand never exactly materialized. [KUNC]

$7.3 million
“Steve Jobs,” that movie about the co-founder of Apple that doesn’t have Ashton Kutcher in it, brought in a lame $7.3 million at the box office in its first weekend in wide release. The film has positive reviews and awards buzz, but that’s a disappointing opening and could mean the movie flops. [Variety]

$46.4 million
The Mets’ postseason run has had an economic impact of $46.4 million on New York City, according to the city’s economic development corporation. That includes money from ticket sales, spending by tourists and additional earnings for seasonal employees. [amNew York]

$500 million
Estimated advertising revenue this year for the AMC television network, which has been buoyed by hit shows like “The Walking Dead” and other scripted content. Five years ago, AMC pulled in about half that amount. [New York Times]

$1 billion
Over the next four years, Washington state anticipates collecting a total of more than $1 billion in tax revenue from marijuana sales. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 free suits
Jos. A. Bank’s famous “buy one suit, get three suits free” sale will end for the final time this coming Sunday. Men’s Wearhouse bought the company in March of 2014. [CNN Money]

6 percentage points
In an average of six polls, that’s how much support swung in former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s favor in the Democratic primary since the first debate. She’s got the largest bump of any other contenders, and with Jim Webb and Joe Biden out already, and Lincoln Chafee circling the drain, this may come out to be a rather good week for the Clinton camp. [FiveThirtyEight]

7 arson attempts
Someone set fire to the doors of the Shrine of St. Joseph church, “marking the seventh attempt to burn a place of worship in the St. Louis area in two weeks.” Listen, I’m no Encyclopedia Brown, but I feel like it may be a good time for police to start, you know, running patrols past churches. Just a hunch. [The Kansas City Star]

11 cents
The FCC is cracking down on companies that ripoff inmates on phone fees, capping the per-minute cost of a call at 11 cents for prisons and 14 to 22 cents for jails. [The Huffington Post]

30 percent
Percentage of the American workforce that is either self-employed (10 percent) or employed by someone who is self-employed (20 percent) in 2014. Both groups together account for approximately 44 million jobs. [Pew Research Center]

50 pots of coffee
A Tumblr run by the National Archives about cool documents turned up a real gem this week: When Dick Cheney was deputy chief of staff for President Gerald Ford, he wrote a very terse memo ratting out Donald Rumsfeld and his team of nine for consuming $100 worth of coffee per month, which breaks down to 50 pots per week. Lightweights, all of them. [Today’s Document via Mental Floss]

90 percent
Vladimir Putin has a 90 percent approval rating in Russia, according to a state-run pollster that is totally legit and in no way influenced by Vladimir Putin, who controls the state that runs it. [The Guardian]

41,710 bite wounds
Number of people who went to the emergency room in the U.S. in 2012 with bite wounds inflicted by another human. [The Washington Post] 

200,000 riders
The Port Authority Bus Terminal handles about 200,000 people per day (one being me). But the terminal is more than 50 years old and is completely unable to handle increased traffic. The Port Authority’s board voted to investigate ways to replace the terminal. My favorite story is the time I saw the guy using the Internet terminals at the pizza joint in the south building to watch pornography during rush hour. Do you have any Port Authority Bus Terminal stories? Did it ever get weird? Send ’em over to @WaltHickey, we have to memorialize this awful scrap-heap while it’s still around. [ABC 7 New York]

$5 billion
Amazon had an earnings report drop Thursday that exceeded investor expectations, sending the stock shooting up. Since lots of CEO Jeff Bezos’ wealth is tied up in that stock, he added an additional $5 billion to his net worth, making him the third richest American. [Business Insider]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4 years
Time since Blink-182’s last album. But, word on the street is the band is coming out with a new one. People who shout along to music in cars, like me, are in a very good place right now. [Mic]

6 documents
WikiLeaks published six documents apparently hacked from CIA Director John Brennan’s personal AOL email as a demonstration that yes, several teenagers did break into the director’s stash. [Motherboard]

10 to 20 people
Number of people in Australia — a supposedly lovely country that is swarming with poisonous, venomous, and aggravated animals — who are bitten annually by the funnel-web spider and must get antivenom, often within an hour. As a result, Australia has drop-off centers for deadly spiders so the proper antivenom can be developed. [Wired]

$12.99 per month
YouTube Red subscribers will pay $10 per month in order to avoid ads. But the really interesting part of this is how aggressively Google is trolling Apple by cranking up the price to $12.99 on iOS, since Apple gets 30 percent of all App Store purchases. [Washington Post]

“25”
Adele announced that her next album will continue the pattern of being named after her age. It will be titled “25.” [BBC]

30 percent
Percentage of global Uber trips that CEO Travis Kalanick reported occur in China. [The Wall Street Journal]

372 points
Following the endorsement of Hillary Clinton by Gov. Jack Markell of Delaware, Clinton will go into the Iowa caucuses with more endorsement points, according to FiveThirtyEight’s reckoning, than any Democrat since at least 1980. [FiveThirtyEight]

2,950 experiments
“Mythbusters,” the last good show on the Discovery Channel, will come to an end next year following its 14th and final season. When all is said and done, Jamie Hyneman and Adam Savage will have put 2,950 myths to an experimental test. Anyone with decent health insurance is welcome to come over to my place to try out for my “Mythbusters” replacement, but it’s most likely a really good way for all participants to get their names on lists. [Entertainment Weekly]

$2 million
Gimlet Media, the podcast startup behind the podcast StartUp, as well as Mystery Show, Reply All and others, reported $2 million in its first year, proving to parents the world over that podcasts are a real thing and “please, get out of my room dad.” [Nieman Lab]

6.5 million
Toyota is recalling 6.5 million cars because of a problem with the power windows switch. Having seen “Fight Club” — and, in particular, that scene in which the narrator talks about how car companies calculate the cost of a recall — I have spent the past day trying to guess how a power windows switch could possibly kill people. Please send all ideas to @WaltHickey, I’m trying to figure this one out. [NBC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
30 years
Public Service Announcement: The Internet is going to suck today if you don’t like “Back To The Future Part II” (1989). Because when Marty McFly went back to the future in that movie, he traveled to Oct. 21, 2015. That’s today! And, in a shocker, a lot of stuff that moviemakers put in a 1989 film set in 2015 never came to be. Be sure to avoid all the tedious listicles of that stuff. In fact, I’ll save you the trouble (spoiler alert!): We don’t have hover boards. [FiveThirtyEight Vintage]

53.8 percent
Percentage of votes cast in the annual NBA general managers survey predicting the Cleveland Cavaliers will win the championship this season. The San Antonio Spurs came in second in the poll, with 25 percent of the vote. [ESPN]

54 percent
Percentage of Democratic-leaning voters who said they would support Hillary Clinton in a primary or caucus, according to a new Washington Post-ABC News poll, up from 42 percent in September. [The Washington Post]

56 percent
Many Americans are full of nervous anticipation with Clinton’s appearance before the House Select Committee on Benghazi merely a day away. Or, maybe not. Americans don’t super care about the Benghazi investigation, with 56 percent reporting they were “not too closely” or “not at all closely” following the investigation. [FiveThirtyEight]

72 percent
Rep. Paul Ryan laid out his conditions for accepting the job of Speaker of the House yesterday. Mainly, he’d only accept the job if all the GOP factions get behind him. One of those factions is the Freedom Caucus, the group of hard-line conservatives who drove John Boehner out of the speaker job. The composition of this group is particularly interesting: 72 percent of them have served less than three terms, and none of them have been members of the institution for more than 10 terms. In the whole House of Representatives, those figures are 47 percent and 20 percent, respectively. [Pew Research Center]

97 percent
Percentage of Tesla owners surveyed by Consumer Reports who said they would purchase a Tesla again. Still, the consumer advocacy group said they decided to not recommend purchasing Tesla’s 2015 Model S sedan due to the car’s overall problem rate. It’s a huge blow to a car company that only last year obtained a perfect score for the model. [Re/Code]

$889
Average weekly earnings for a full-time male worker in the third quarter, compared to $721 for women. The gender wage gap widened, with men seeing a 2.2 percent increase compared to the same quarter last year, while women only saw a 0.8 percent increase. [The Wall Street Journal]

1,000,000 trees
A program initiated by former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg to plant a million trees in the city will finally reach its goal Wednesday, when the millionth tree — a lacebark elm destined to reside in Joyce Kilmer Park in the Bronx — will be planted with both the former mayor and current Hizzoner Bill de Blasio in attendance. [The New York Times]

$5.5 million
Sony Pictures will pay anywhere from $5.5 million to $8 million to put an end to a class action lawsuit from current and former employees who saw personal information leaked as a result of last year’s hack. The attorneys in the case will get about $3.5 million, while a $2 million fund will be set up to give up to $1,000 each to affected individuals. [The Hollywood Reporter]

$223 million
How much Yahoo paid in the third quarter in “traffic acquisition costs,” which is when a company pays for traffic to its website. That’s up from $54 million in the same quarter last year. Yahoo’s status as a crucial Internet hub appears to be in jeopardy. [Reuters]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 live rounds
An actor and a bystander were shot after a mock Old West gunfight in Tombstone, Arizona, turned real: Live rounds were somehow placed in one of the guns. [The New York Post]

6.5 years
A DEA agent who helped bring down the Silk Road, the bitcoin-fueled Amazon.com of illegal drugs, was sentenced to six and a half years behind bars after pleading guilty to extortion, money laundering and obstruction of justice. The agent “used his position in the investigation to swindle his way to a payout of more $700,000 in Bitcoin and a Hollywood contract.” [Mother Jones]

7 turnovers
Monday Night Football was grim last night, with the Philadelphia Eagles and New York Giants combining for seven turnovers, including Eli Manning’s pick-six. The Giants lost 27-7. On the other hand, we got the new Star Wars trailer at halftime, so the evening was an emotional wash for me. [Sports Illustrated]

24 percent
Toymaker Hasbro saw 24 percent growth in its boys division in the third quarter, largely thanks to the release of new “Star Wars” merchandise. Revenues from girls toys — for some reason Hasbro separates the two, which is so 2005 — were down 28 percent. [Quartz]

44 percent
Tough break for Jeb Bush in a new Wall Street Journal/CBS News poll: 44 percent of GOP primary voters said they couldn’t even imagine themselves supporting his candidacy. [The Wall Street Journal]

184 seats
Still, not all is lost for the political progeny of prominent world leaders: Justin Trudeau, son of former Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, led the Liberal Party to a decisive win in Canada’s elections yesterday. The Liberals took 184 seats and scored a decisive majority over the incumbent Conservatives, led by current Prime Minister Stephen Harper. [CBC]

$250,000
Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel will announce a $250,000 gun buyback program. But it’s unclear whether buyback programs really reduce the availability of firearms in an area. [The Christian Science Monitor]

15 million users
Reported user count for Apple Music, Apple’s new streaming service. The catch: 8.5 million of those users are still on a free trial, leaving only about 6.5 million paying customers. For comparison, competitor Spotify had about 20 million paying subscribers as of June. [Engadget]

$43 million
Oprah Winfrey dropped $43 million to buy 10 percent of Weight Watchers, which sent the company’s stock shooting up. Weight Watchers has had a rough several years, with increased competition from other fitness services. [Forbes]

$6 billion
My favorite kind of mistake on Wall Street are “fat-finger” errors, which basically means someone pushed the wrong button at a critical moment and put a bunch of money in a place they would otherwise have preferred not to put it. I like these because I get to imagine a banker with disproportionately massive fingers. My delight aside, these mistakes are probably a gigantic headache for places like Deutsche Bank, where a junior foreign exchange trader accidentally transferred $6 billion to a U.S. hedge fund. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 Larry David
“Saturday Night Live” scored the casting coup of the year, getting Larry David to play doppelgänger and presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders in a sketch about last week’s Democratic primary debate. David’s impression was so dead-on I assume Jim Webb called NBC to ask for equal time. [YouTube]

2 super PAC events
Donald Trump may claim he doesn’t need a super PAC, but the “Make America Great Again” PAC — which like all super PACs seeks to separate rich people from lots of their money in order to elect another rich person — is still supporting his bid. And The Donald has supported the PAC: He’s appeared at at least two of its events. [The Washington Post]

39.1 percent
Canadians vote to elect a new government on Monday, and Justin Trudeau’s Liberal Party is leading the polls with 39.1 percent, according to a new tracking poll. The incumbent Conservative Party has 30.5 percent. [The Guardian]

75 percent
Share of the world’s supply of maple syrup that comes from Quebec. Twenty-five Quebec residents are on trial for trying to steal $18 million in maple syrup between 2011 and 2012. [The Guardian]

95 TV markets
Number of television markets — out of about 200 — in which the Dallas Cowboys were the first or second most broadcast NFL team over the past six seasons, by far the most of any team. [FiveThirtyEight]

383 days
Scott Kelly, an astronaut participating in a long-term mission aboard the International Space Station, saw on Friday his 383rd cumulative day in space, beating the previous record held by Mike Fincke. [NASA]

400 feet
Big news (for people who care about the length of bread): There’s a new record for longest baguette. The “Guinness Book of World Records” certified that a 400-foot baguette produced by 60 French and Italian bakers is the new record holder. [The Associated Press]

10.3 million Swiss francs
Spiegel has uncovered evidence that Germany won its bid to host the 2006 World Cup, in part, through bribes. Then-Adidas CEO Robert Louis-Dreyfus reportedly set up an account with 10.3 million Swiss francs to pay people off. [Spiegel]

$101 million
Combined advertising spending from two daily fantasy sports sites, FanDuel and DraftKings, between August and mid-September. About $81 million of that was DraftKings. [The Wall Street Journal]

$4.6 billion
How much money Medicare’s prescription drug program paid out in the first six months of 2015 on hepatitis C drugs. That’s much more than in the same period last year thanks to new, yet expensive, drugs to treat the liver illness. [ProPublica]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
55 percent
Percentage of registered Democrats who thought Hillary Clinton won Tuesday’s debate, according to a new Huffington Post/YouGov poll. About 22 percent said Sen. Bernie Sanders won. [The Huffington Post]

617 emergency room visits
About 617 people go to the emergency room each year due to side effects of taking sexual-enhancement supplements. [FiveThirtyEight]

$2,700
How much Martin Shkreli, the CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals, tried to donate to Sen. Bernie Sanders. Sanders declined the contribution, and will donate it to a health clinic in Washington. Shkreli was the guy who tried to jack up the price of a life-saving drug from $13.50 a pill to $750. [The Week]

9,800 U.S. troops
President Obama announced on Thursday that he will maintain 9,800 troops in Afghanistan through most of next year. For some perspective on the matter, the U.S. has had troops in Afghanistan since I was 11 years old. [FiveThirtyEight]

$15,457.86
Democrat Lincoln Chafee reported raising a skull-crushing $15,000 in campaign contributions in the third quarter, which is slightly less than the cost of a Ford Focus. [FEC, via @ByronTau]

200,000 laser pointers
Approximate number of standard laser pointers (the kind you use to distract your cat) one would need to assemble into a weapon capable of killing someone. Remember yesterday when I said my laser tag team was accepting applications? We’re no longer accepting new members, we’re kind of scared of who’s going to apply now. [Gizmodo]

220,000 investors
Number of investors in China who may lose their money after all trading at the Fanya Metal Exchange was suspended six months ago. [Quartz]

800,000 Facebook profiles
According to Facebook, around 800,000 Americans have changed their profile in the past year to express a same-sex attraction. Call it the “Anthony Kennedy Facebook Effect.” [Facebook]

$4.2 million
New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, still running for president, raised $4.2 million this past quarter, about 67 percent of which was already spent in the same period. Christie is barely hovering above the polling average needed to earn a podium at the forthcoming CNBC debate. He also killed the proposal to build another New Jersey to New York City tunnel, which has kind of ruined my commute for the past three years. So yes, I have a bone to pick with the guy. [The Wall Street Journal]

$77 billion
Cost to the U.S. economy in 2010 due to hungover workers, according to the CDC. In related news, today I learned the government is hella judgy. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
6 months
Bloomberg terminals are vastly powerful and essentially mandatory data sources for the entire global financial industry. They also have a chat feature that is the primary way people in the banking business converse among themselves, a feature that can get so addictive that Bloomberg allows users who lose their jobs access to a terminal at home for free for six months just to keep them hooked. [FiveThirtyEight Podcasts]

12 percent
Wal-Mart stock took a quick dive yesterday after the company predicted profits would drop by as much as 12 percent in the next year. [The Wall Street Journal]

30 feet long, 7 feet wide
The Wolf Science Center in Austria installed a massive treadmill 30 feet in length and 7 feet in width in order to study cooperation among dogs and wolves. The scientists are interested in whether the animals are more likely to share food after going on a run together — like when your stoned friend promises to buy you a Doritos Locos Taco if you walk with him to Taco Bell. [Scientific American]

800 pounds
A court ruled that a former London Zoo meerkat expert must pay a former colleague — a monkey-handler whom she attacked with a wine glass — 800 pounds, which is about $1,235 in Florida, the place where this kind of news story typically happens. Both of the women had dated the same llama-keeper. If this was published anywhere except the Associated Press I would not have believed a single word of it. [Associated Press]

23,005 visits
A new study estimates just over 23,000 annual emergency room visits are due to side effects from the consumption of dietary supplements. As a result of this devastating news, I have decided to stop chasing tequila shots with Omega-3 fatty acid fish oil, or as I like to call the combination, a Moby Dickleback. [The New England Journal of Medicine]

64,073
With 83,844 Puerto Rico residents leaving the territory to move to the U.S. mainland and only 19,771 people making the reverse trip, that’s the net migration out of Puerto Rico, a level not seen in over 50 years. The territory is still in a recession that has lasted for almost a decade. [Pew Research Center]

$35 million
That’s how much House Speaker John Boehner raised for Republicans for the 2014 campaign through three PACs. Rep. Paul Ryan, who is being recruited aggressively for the speakership after Boehner’s resignation, doesn’t want the job or its awful fundraising circus. But some of the people encouraging Ryan are suggesting he could skip the fundraising if it means he’ll take the job. [Bloomberg]

$850.2 million
Sales last year processed through payment and point-of-sale service Square, the other company helmed by incoming Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey. The company filed to go public Wednesday. [The Wall Street Journal]

$862 million
Apple could owe up to $862 million to the University of Wisconsin-Madison after a jury found the company used technology owned by the university in the processors of several iPhone models without permission. [Reuters]

100,825,272,791
Estimated number of people who have ever lived, from my colleague Mona Chalabi. A reader asked her about the demographics of heaven. Seems crowded up there — I plan to end up in Valhalla, the enormous Asgardian hall where heroes slain in glorious battle go upon death. If you’d prefer that as well, my laser tag team has decided to hold an open tryout, feel free to contact me @WaltHickey. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3.6
The Chicago Cubs saw the league’s biggest leap in ratings for their games this summer, more than doubling the number of viewers for an average rating of 3.6. The Cubs’ solid season has continued well into the playoffs: Chicago sank St. Louis on Tuesday and won its playoff series, meaning the Cubs are headed to the NLCS. [Forbes]

6 percent
That’s the divorce rate in “The Sims 4,” according to the game’s publisher, EA, with 27.5 million marriages resulting in 1.7 million divorces. That’s vastly lower than the actual U.S. divorce rate. It also directly conflicts my understanding of the mechanics of “The Sims,” given that I’ve been working from the belief that all marriages ended either in death by burning appliance or by drowning because a cruel god removed all the ladders to exit the swimming pool. [Motherboard]

8 percent
Twitter will lay off up to 336 employees, or 8 percent of its workforce, to cut costs. [The New York Times]

11 questions
Foreign policy was the biggest topic at last night’s Democratic primary debate, with 11 questions asked. The economy was right behind with eight questions, and immigration and the assorted Clinton scandals accounted for six each. Be sure to check out our whole live coverage of the debate. [FiveThirtyEight]

$12
Cost of “A Glass Case of Emotion,” a cocktail at a Will Ferrell-themed cocktail bar opening in New York. The drink contains rosemary, peach, whiskey, lemon juice and simple syrup, for amateur mixologists looking to take a chance on it. Other Ferrell-themed cocktails include the “Milk Was A Bad Choice,” the “You’re My Boy, Blue,” and “The F*cking Catalina Wine Mixer.” While I’m telling myself now that I intend to studiously avoid this bar, I make terrible decisions when drinking and so will let you know how it is once I inevitably check it out. [Vulture]

28 minutes, 10 seconds
How much time former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton got to talk at last night’s Democratic debate, the longest of any candidate. Runner-up Sen. Bernie Sanders talked for 26 minutes, 19 seconds, while rounding errors Martin O’Malley, Jim Webb and that other guy, whatever his name is, all talked for 15 minutes or less. [ABC News]

50 percent
Royal Dutch Shell is pulling out of Arctic drilling as the company struggles with decreasing oil prices across the board: Profits were down 50 percent between 2012 and 2014, whereas competitors Exxon Mobil and Chevron saw respective profit declines of 28 percent and 27 percent in the same period. [Newsweek]

$127,000
A Manhattan woman sued her 8-year-old nephew for $127,000, claiming the child was negligent when he jumped into her arms for a hug, injuring her. Yesterday a Connecticut jury decided to award the litigious aunt $0, because that is a terrible thing to sue over. [Connecticut Post]

$10 million CAD
Two Canadian executives were charged with illegally selling $10 million CAD worth of railway material to Iran from 2007 to 2012, skirting sanctions against the nation. [CBC]

38 million
The way New Yorkers get around above-ground is shifting with the ascendance of Uber. New Yorkers took 42 million yellow cab rides and 2 million Uber rides from April to June of 2014. In the same period this year, New Yorkers took 38 million cab rides but 8 million Uber rides; pickups were up only slightly overall. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
