
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5-yard penalty

The NFL has approved a New England Patriots-inspired penalty that makes it illegal for an ineligible player wearing an eligible number to line up outside the tackle box. Still, not a lot of comfort for fans of the Baltimore Ravens, who lost a playoff game in which the Patriots used the formation. [ESPN]


17.6 percent down
As Russia’s economic crisis continues, alcohol sales are taking a hit: Vodka sales were down 17.6 percent by volume year-over-year in January, and beer sales were down 10.5 percent. Demand isn’t thought to be decreasing, however: People unable to afford those beverages are reportedly drinking more moonshine, medical alcohol and cleaning products. [Associated Press]

32 indictments

Marijuana is legal in Colorado. Marijuana is not legal in most other states. As a result, it’s not legal to grow pot in Colorado and then ship it other places. But this might seem like a good idea! It was probably the first idea a lot of us had when we heard about legal marijuana. It’s not a good idea! Colorado has indicted 32 people who are accused of having such an idea — and a multimillion-dollar business plan to go with it. [Denver Post]

40 percent
Percentage of survey respondents who told the Pew Research Center that they thought they paid more than their fair share of taxes considering what they received from the federal government. [Pew Research Center]

556.856 miles
New record for number of miles traveled by bicycle in 24 hours. [Outside Online]

174,000 years ago
An Icelandic study estimated that the most recent common male ancestor for all of humanity lived between 174,000 and 321,000 years ago. I’m not so sure about that, but then again, my only frame of reference is the reimagined “Battlestar Galactica” television series. [The Verge]

213,000 students


That’s the enrollment figure at the for-profit University of Phoenix, down from about 460,000 five years ago. [CNN Money]

600 million
The number of people Facebook reports use its Messenger app monthly. The company — like many before it — sees its messaging service as an alternative to email. Email was unavailable for comment yet presumably remains both vestigial and immortal. [Medium]


$46 billion
Heinz and Kraft Foods — two companies that make a lot of the stuff Americans eat — are merging. Interestingly, it appears that Wall Street’s biggest investment banks were uncharacteristically uninvolved in the $46 billion merger. [Bloomberg Business]

$3.8 trillion budget

House Republicans approved a $3.8 trillion budget. [USA Today]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
0
The U.K. inflation rate in February, bolstering the case for the Bank of England to maintain low interest rates. [Bloomberg Business]

Once every 4 days
The U.S. power grid experiences a physical or digital attack about once every four days, a USA Today investigation of federal records has found. Please note that I used “digital” rather than “cyber.” That is because the word “cyber” is dumb and must be destroyed. [USA Today]



23 years

Debra Milke was convicted in the 1989 killing of her 4-year-old son and then spent 23 years on death row in Arizona. The charges against her were formally dismissed Monday. [Arizona Republic]


36 percent
Support for Boston’s bid to host the 2024 Summer Olympics among residents as of last week, according to polling by the city’s NPR news station. The group organizing the bid now supports putting it to a referendum. [New York Times]

75 days
Costa Rica derived its electricity from renewable sources for 75 days straight, a trend facilitated by heavy rain and power generation from, conveniently, hydroelectric plants fueled by the rains. [IFL Science]

250 miles

Scientists in Australia have discovered what they are describing as the largest asteroid impact area ever. The area, which is 250 miles wide, was found during drilling for a geothermal research project. The asteroid is thought to have hit at least 300 million years ago. [BBC]

470 delicious, savory calories
Taco Bell is out with a new biscuit taco, combining my two favorite words in the English language. It has a maximum of 470 calories. It sounds amazing. God bless America. [Christian Science Monitor]

$20,000 per year

Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s wife is taking a leave of absence from her job at Goldman Sachs to help him campaign for president, meaning that the couple is losing their $20,000 per year health insurance policy. [Bloomberg Politics]

4.6 million


Through a records request, tech blog Ars Technica obtained a data set of 4.6 million license plate scans taken by the Oakland Police Department’s automated readers between Dec. 23, 2010, and May 31, 2014. The data can be used to approximate where people live with some degree of accuracy. [Ars Technica]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 game
The NFL is dipping its toe in the water of alternative distribution methods — the rights to one game this year, to be played in London, will be sold to a digital distribution company. [Wall Street Journal]

More than 4 percent

SeaWorld, accused in a 2013 documentary of mistreating the orcas it owns, saw its attendance fall more than 4 percent for the second year in a row. The company launched a campaign to assure people that, nah, the whales are like totally cool with the whole captivity thing. [Fusion]


$10 fine
Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas announced his bid for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination during Liberty University’s convocation, an event that students are required to attend. Those who don’t show up face a $10 fine, a Liberty sophomore told National Journal. Several Rand Paul supporters not only attended but donned shirts showing their support for the Kentucky senator. [National Journal]

12 percent

Prime-time ratings for the Discovery Channel are up 12 percent so far this year as the network tries to expand the base of people who watch shows about people trying to find a big shark or something. [USA Today]

30 percent


Each of the first five issues of the latest run of “Thor” — the one in which the bearer of Mjolnir is female — sold about 30 percent more copies than the corresponding issue of the preceding run, “Thor: God of Thunder,” in which the title character was the Odinson comic book fans know. [The Verge]

40 percent
The estimated share of content viewed on YouTube that is in the music video genre. [Quartz]

390 shootings
The Justice Department released a report criticizing the Philadelphia Police Department over its training and shooting review procedures. Officers have been involved in 390 shootings over the past eight years, roughly one per week. [New York Times]

5,000 words
A physicist who worked on the hydrogen bomb more than 60 years ago was asked by federal officials recently to cut roughly 5,000 words from his memoir — 10 percent of the text — after a security review. He didn’t. [New York Times]

$2 billion

Reported valuation of Slack, the company behind the messaging product of the same name. [Business Insider]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
42 percent
The NCAA men’s basketball tournament wrapped up its round of 32 on Sunday, and Kentucky remains favored to win the title. Our forecast has the Wildcats winning 42 percent of the time. [FiveThirtyEight]

1 in 45
Probability that the son of an NBA player goes on to become an NBA player. [New York Times]

59 years
With 18.6 inches of snow so far, New York City has seen historic levels of the precipitation for the month of March. It’s the most in 59 years and the seventh-highest in 148 years. [FiveThirtyEight]

More than 70 percent
Portion of The New York Times’ revenue last year that derived from print. [New York Times]

77 percent to 79 percent
The venture capital world is under heavy scrutiny because of a high-profile lawsuit alleging gender discrimination at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. According to an expert called to testify, 77 percent to 79 percent of venture capital firms industrywide “have never had a woman represent them on the board of one of their portfolio companies.” [Wired]


$40 million to $50 million
Texas Sen. Ted Cruz is poised to be the first Republican to formally jump into the 2016 presidential race Monday. He’s looking to raise $40 million to $50 million during the primary campaign. [Houston Chronicle]


$54 million
“Insurgent,” the sequel to young adult novel adaptation “Divergent,” won the box office this weekend, taking in $54 million. [Yahoo News]



$1.362 billion

Total gross for the 2013-14 Broadway season, according to the Broadway League. [New York Post]


$9 billion
Amount gambled on the NCAA basketball tournament over four days this year, compared with $7 billion spent over two years of the 2012 presidential election season. [Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
0.7 percent
Just three games into the NCAA men’s tournament on Thursday, only 0.7 percent of the 11.57 million brackets submitted to ESPN remained perfect. That only got worse as the night went on. [ESPN]

50 years
As of Thursday, that’s how long it’s been since the first time a person managed to float in space outside of a box designed to keep someone alive in space. On Mar. 18, 1965, cosmonaut Alexey Leonov went on the first spacewalk. [io9]

559 jokes
An analysis of Federal Reserve open-market committee transcripts looked at how often the board was reduced to laughter in each transcript. Former Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan landed 559 jokes during his long tenure, the most of any Fed leader. [The Atlantic]

100,000 convictions
A batch of racially insensitive — to understate this a bit — text messages from five San Francisco police officers were released last week. As a result, about 100,000 convictions are being reviewed for bias. [Gawker]

$3 million
That’s the FBI reward for information about Russian cybercriminal Evgeniy Bogachev. It’s the first time the feds have put out a bounty on a hacker. Guys, at some point we need to really reconsider using the word “cyber.” It’s getting antiquated. [Associated Press]

$194 million
The NCAA makes a bunch of money from March Madness. It gives a portion of that money — $194 million last year — to the conferences that send teams to the tournament based on how well the teams do there. But the NCAA has a somewhat convoluted way of allocating all that cash. [Bloomberg Business]

1.35 billion
Visits to U.S. Government websites over the past 90 days. Check out this wild tool to see the government’s web traffic. Their traffic makes Buzzfeed look like some Firefly fan’s Geocities site. [Analytics.USA.Gov]

$4.2 billion
Amount Blue Shield of California had in its coffers when it was stripped of its tax-exmpt status. That’s a lot of profit for a non-profit. [Los Angeles Times]

$2 trillion
Amount of foreign money held by Swiss banks. The U.S. is negotiating an agreement with the Swiss as the former tries to combat tax evasion. Having seen the documentary “The Wolf Of Wall Street” I sincerely believe this is a problem. [CNN]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
Just do it people. 
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 acre
Want to grow an acre’s worth of lettuce? Order yourself the CropBox — basically a high-tech farm within a shipping container. This is an exceptional product; my hydroponic equipment and grow lamps have been really heating up my attic lettuce farm. [Fast Company]

5.8 rating
Fox’s “Empire” wrapped up Season 1 last night with a 2-hour finale. The show was one of the big success stories of the midseason, debuting to a 3.8 rating and steadily growing to a 5.8 rating last week. [The Daily Beast]

$9 per hour
Target is raising its minimum wage to $9 per hour, following a similar move by Wal-Mart. [BuzzFeed]

15 years
That’s about how long people have been using cell phones. If there were legitimate deleterious or carcinogenic health effects associated with cell phone use, we probably would be starting to see them. Similarly, epidemiologists observed an increase in lung cancer deaths after the World War II. So chill out, Nick Bilton. [Popular Science]

$921,600
How much did “To Pimp A Butterfly,” the new album from Kendrick Lamar, make? He broke Spotify’s record for streams, and calculations indicate he made somewhere between $921,600 and $1,290,240 in a single day. [Hopes&Fears]

$1 million
Former Rep. Anthony Weiner left an interesting nugget in an article he wrote about the downfall of Rep. Aaron Schock: During Weiner’s own scandal, ethics lawyers told him he’d need to find $1 million in order to defend himself. Scandals can be really expensive, even before the other shoe drops. [Business Insider]

10 million units
The number of Wii U’s sold since 2012. That’s really low — the Wii sold ten times that from 2006 to 2014. In need of a win, Nintendo has announced they’re going to begin developing games for mobile platforms. [TIME]

$11.7 million
“Evolution,” an online blackmarket for drugs, has vanished with $11.7 million in bitcoins. I am not shocked. Repeat after me: If someone sells me drugs on the Internet and steals my money, I should have seen it coming. [Ars Technica]

$6.97 billion
The amount of recorded music sold last year, down from $14.6 billion in 1999. Revenue from streaming services amounted to $1.87 billion, which is more than the $1.85 billion derived from CD sales — the first time streaming has beaten CDs. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION: Wednesday’s Significant Digits incorrectly said Schock is a representative from Indiana. He is from Illinois.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
15 percent drop
Weight Watcher’s shares dropped more than 30 percent after the company’s earnings came out Tuesday. According to the weight-loss company, membership decreased by 15 percent in the final quarter of last year. Analysts think Weight Watchers may be bleeding members to free alternatives to its subscription service. [Business Insider]

24 to 36 hours
The sun is exploding. That isn’t exactly news — that’s what the sun is doing all the time — but it’s been exploding provocatively  since 10 a.m. Tuesday, producing a severe geomagnetic storm. This can affect electronics and GPS equipment, so consider trusting Apple Maps less than usual until this all ends (it’s expected to end sometime Wednesday). [Mashable]

34 percent
Of Americans familiar with recently revealed domestic government surveillance programs, 34 percent have taken one or more steps to hide their information from the feds. [Pew Research Center]

165 mph winds
We’re finally getting data about the monster cyclone that hit the small island nation of Vanuatu in the South Pacific. At peak strength, the cyclone had winds of 165 miles per hour, equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane. Port Vila, the nation’s capital, was devastated by the storm. [Weather Channel]

340 percent rate of return
Karen Rubin analyzed the performance of Fortune 1000 companies from 2002 to 2014. Rubin found that when a female CEO was at the helm companies generated a 340 percent return for investors, compared to a 112 percent return for the S&P 500 benchmark. [Quartz]

550 tons of donated weapons
The nation of Bosnia-Herzegovina is donating 550 tons worth of ammunition and arms left over as surplus from the Bosnian war to Iraq to aid the country’s fight against Islamic State. [UPI]

32,000 awesome people whose day was ruined by a Nordic furniture store
Ikea said they will not allow people to play hide-and-seek in their stores in the Netherlands. Ikea’s decision came after a Facebook event for a game where 32,000 people signed up. This is a bummer, because the ASKVOLL bed frame really makes a perfect hiding spot (in addition to a nice bedroom accent). [NPR]

170,000 miles
Rep. Aaron Schock, Republican of Illinois, announced his intention to resign Tuesday after POLITICO reported that the congressman had billed the government for mileage he did not drive, potentially reaping tens of thousands of dollars in the process. The representative billed taxpayers for 170,000 miles on his car, which only had about 80,000 miles on the odometer when it was sold last summer. [POLITICO]

$8 million
The Secret Service wants $8 million to build a replica of the White House for training purposes. The Secret Service, an organization tasked with protecting the president, fighting counterfeiting and — presumably — not soliciting prostitutes abroad, has not had a great run of it lately. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (March 18, 10:43 a.m.): A previous version of this article incorrectly said Schock is a representative from Indiana. He is from Illinois.


--------------------------------


Happy St. Patrick’s Day. You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
10 years
Harry Windsor, a well-known Briton, is leaving the armed forces after 10 years of service. Prince Harry, an Apache helicopter pilot who served 2 tours in Afghanistan, will complete his service in June. [The Guardian]

11 feet
Like lots of ice on Earth, the Totten Glacier in Antarctica is melting. This is not great; the Totten Glacier holds back a lot of ice that could otherwise go into the oceans. If that happens, sea levels could rise by 11 feet. I feel like someone should look into this. [Washington Post]

15 square miles
Region of Brooklyn and the Bronx covered by ShotSpotter, a system of sensors that pickup and locate the sound of gunfire. The NYPD, following the lead of several other cities, announced it was using the program on Monday. [New York Times]

24 years old
Chris Borland, a 24-year-old linebacker for the San Francisco 49ers, said he is retiring due to concerns over the long-term health effects of repeated head traumas. Borland was one of the NFL’s best rookies last season. [ESPN]

25 channels
That’s the reported number of the approximate number of channels Apple’s forthcoming television project will launch with. [The Verge]

$3,341
Companies are looking to improve employee retention by using data to figure out who is eyeing the exit. Part of the companies’ motivation: The average cost to hire a new employee is $3,341, according to the Society for Human Resource Management, an organization that admittedly sounds somewhat ominous and menacing, but I can assure you is actually a legitimate organization for H.R. professionals. [Wall Street Journal]

$837,000 office pool
A NFL “survivor” pool of epic proportions led the police to raid a New Jersey man’s home. The pool, run by John Bovery, was worth $837,000 in 2009, Bovery said. It had nearly 4,000 participants. [NJ.com]

16.4 million uninsured
About 16.4 million people have gained coverage under the Affordable Care Act, according to the secretary of health and human services. [New York Times]

$338 billion
Profit for the insurance industry last year. The industry thrives on people misunderstanding their own risk and may be threatened by data services that better inform consumers of realistic health risks. [The Economist]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as a email newsletter, subscribe.
$19.97
Cost of a 95-page booklet describing a cinnamon-based cure for diabetes. GOP presidential contender and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee was a spokesman for the product. Now would probably be a good time to mention that cinnamon does not cure diabetes. [New York Times]

41 percent
March Madness has begun: The men’s bracket was announced Sunday night, and FiveThirtyEight’s model gives the University of Kentucky a 41 percent chance of winning the whole thing. [FiveThirtyEight]

90 percent of buildings
Vanuatu, an island nation located in the Pacific, was ravaged by a cyclone that reportedly damaged 90 percent of the buildings in Port Vila, the capital. [Associated Press]


90 percent
We’re not super sure what’s up with Russian President Vladimir Putin lately. He hasn’t been seen in public, which has caused a lot of speculation about what Russia would be like without him. One group of people presumably not speculating about this: the 90 percent of Russians who get their news from state controlled television. [The Atlantic]

108.6 inches
Oh, look, Boston totally beat the previous city record for total winter snowfall. “There will be no parade,” tweeted the mayor. [Associated Press]

1,500 streams
According to Billboard, 1,500 streams of a song is considered equivalent to one album sale. That differs substantially from the current market value of those streams. [Kernal Mag]

1,609 active rigs
Peak rig activity in the U.S. over the past several years, reached on Oct. 10, 2014. The recent collapse of oil prices have meant the number of active rigs has cratered. [Bloomberg Business]

10,000 years
How long a volcano needs to chill out before being described as “dormant.” The distinction between an “active,” “dormant” and “extinct” volcano is actually somewhat nuanced. Extinct volcanos are cut off from a magma supply, active volcanos are, well, active, and dormant volcanoes haven’t erupted for at least 10,000 years (but with scientists believing it will erupt again). [Mental Floss]

$500,000 per episode
When Netflix scored the digital distribution rights for “Friends,” they paid more than $500,000 per episode. Now that “Seinfeld” is on the block, the 180 episodes are reportedly going to catch an even higher price. While Netflix has tapped out of the negotiations, Amazon, Yahoo and Hulu are reportedly still in. [Wall Street Journal]

117 million .coms
The “.com” moniker turned 30 on Sunday. March 15, 1985 was the day manufacturer Symbolics decided to claim “Symbolics.com” as their web address, the first of now 117 million dot-com websites. [VentureBeat]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. If you don’t see a significant digit in the wild, still tweet @WaltHickey, because why not. 
