
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here.
1 gallon
In drought-stricken California, the amount of water needed to make one almond. [Mother Jones]

5 percent
According to a December CNN poll, the share of the vote U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan held in a hypothetical Republican primary. The former vice presidential candidate from Wisconsin removed himself from 2016 presidential contention Monday. [CNN, NBC]

$16 per hour
Aetna increased its minimum hourly wage to $16, raising the income of its lowest-paid workers by a third in an attempt to attract and maintain talent. [Wall Street Journal]

49 percent
Films that won the Golden Globe for best drama won the Academy Award for best picture 49 percent of the time. [FiveThirtyEight]

53 prisoners
Cuba, at the behest of the United States, has released 53 prisoners, including members of prominent protest groups. [Reuters]

65 counties
Based on four measured categories — jobs, home prices, economic output and unemployment rate — only 65 of 3,069 U.S. counties have met or exceeded pre-recession economic levels. None of the recovered counties has more than 500,000 residents. [Wall Street Journal]

238 days
A premiere date has been set for “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert.” The former Comedy Central host will have his first show on CBS on Sept. 8. David Letterman is set to sign off on May 20. There are 238 days from Tuesday to the preordained date of the return of the king. [Mashable]

998,000 players
Minecraft was played by almost a million people simultaneously on Friday, potentially making it the most played PC game over Dota 2. [PC Gamer]

500 million
Number of Cadbury creme eggs made every year, two-thirds of which are consumed in England. The company — owned by Mondelez International — has shifted to a new recipe, which as far as I can tell is the U.K. equivalent to the Coca-Cola company burning a flag. [CNN]

8,463,194,794 chickens
The USDA’s Census of Agriculture compiles a count of where America’s livestock lives. America’s many chickens — some 8.5 billion — are concentrated in the Southeast. [Business Insider]

As always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here.
1/100th of a millimeter
Seattle Seahawks fans are a notoriously loud bunch. Their stomping and jumping at CenturyLink Field lit up a nearby seismometer in 2011, shaking the sensor about 1/100th of a millimeter. Geologists this year outfitted the stadium with monitoring sensors to directly measure the effect, hoping to test new technology for monitoring earthquakes. I personally hope they’re finally able to find the geological impact of thousands of people simultaneously jumping on a bandwagon. [Wired]

10.5 percent
Fast-casual restaurants — the Shake Shacks and Chipotles of America — are coming off a banner year, with combined sales rising 10.5 percent last year. Fast-food chains saw only a 6.1 percent rise. One reason fast casual outpaces fast food: The former restaurants typically get 40 percent more out of each diner’s wallet than the latter. [The Economist]

20 percent
Percent of India’s 40 million construction workers who are women. They’re paid less than their male coworkers and are exposed to safety hazards and sexual harassment. [Reuters]

87 people
The number of individuals who participate in the Hollywood Foreign Press Association vote on who wins the Golden Globes. The voters are sometimes neither foreign nor press. [Vocativ]

316 minutes
A Boeing 777-200 jet made the flight from New York to London in a mere 5 hours, 16 minutes, an hour and a half ahead of schedule. The flight benefited from a surging jet stream between the cities, and while hardly a record — the Concorde could make the journey in 2 hours, 53 minutes — the time is a vast boost over a typical crossing. [The Telegraph]


2,287 tickets
Summonses in the City of New York were down 92 percent in the week ending Jan. 4 compared to a year ago. There were 29,434 summonses and 5,370 arrests in the same week last year and only 2,287 summonses and 1,820 arrests this year. While the evidence points to a police enforcement slowdown, my alternative theory is that New Yorkers are just really good at keeping their new year’s resolutions to stop doing crimes. [New York Times]

$5,000
For $5,000 above the sticker price, buyers of the Corvette Z06 can enjoy the “Energy Build Experience” in which Chevy lets drivers personally construct the engine of their new car. It’s basically space camp for dads. [Car and Driver]

14,000 tanning salons
Indoor tanning is alive and well in America, despite evidence that links the practice to skin cancer. There are roughly 14,000 tanning salons nationwide, with more in Florida than McDonald’s restaurants. [New York Times]

3.7 million
Estimate from the French Interior Ministry of the number of participants across France in a rally to repudiate terrorism. [Associated Press]

16.5 million
The number of new autos that hit the street in 2014, the highest since 2006. December 2014 sales were up 10.8 percent over December 2013. Reasons cited include an economy bouncing back, cheaper gas, higher consumer confidence and cheap leases. [New York Times]

CORRECTION (Jan. 12, 9:18 a.m.): The headline on a previous version of this article misstated a pretty significant digit. It’s 2015, not 2014.
As always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here.
2.5 GPA
Minimum grade to reap the benefits of a proposed tuition-free community college system proposed by President Obama. If all states participate, the program could cover almost 9 million people. [The New York Times]

9 miles
Rob Konrad, a former NFL fullback, swam 9 miles back to shore after falling off his boat while fishing off the coast of South Florida. Seems worth noting that he once played for the Miami Dolphins. [Associated Press]

12.9 percent uninsured
The uninsured rate among U.S. adults is at 12.9 percent, down from 13.4 percent in the third quarter of 2014 and steeply down from 17.1 percent a year ago. [Gallup]

17 degrees Fahrenheit
That’s the forecasted high for Mars, specifically the location of the Curiosity rover’s location in the Gale Crater. It’s also warmer than the forecasted high for the entire state of Michigan on Friday. [@MarsWxReport]

20.3 percent cut
The Pentagon is seeking $51 billion in Overseas Contingency Operation funding — which pays for wars, in addition to the basic defense spending of about $534 billion — in the upcoming fiscal year, about a 20 percent cut from this year’s allocation of $64 billion. [Bloomberg]

88 percent
It’s 2015, which means that we’re in for a miserable year of people pointing out that the plot of “Back to the Future Part 2” is supposed to play out come October. The roundups of the film’s predictions have already begun, and 88 percent of articles about them mentioned the self-lacing shoes or the flying car and every single one mentioned the hoverboard. [FiveThirtyEight]

85,432 people
Five years out from a devastating earthquake, that’s the number of Haitians still living in tent camps as of September 2014. [CEPR]

42 million people

Following decades of declining marriage rates, the share of never-married Americans is at an all-time high; 23 percent of men and 17 percent of women over 25 have never been married. That’s 42 million people who still have the joys of explicit monogamy to look forward to. [Pew Research Center]


$52 million
Auction houses Christie’s and Sotheby’s are returning to the practice of guaranteeing sellers a price, which would require the auction houses to pay out in the event of an unimpressive sale. Sotheby’s lost $52 million in a single season in late 2008, after guaranteeing prices to sellers. [The New York Times]

$70 million fine
Honda was fined a record $70 million for underreporting fatal accidents and injuries to the government. [The New York Times]

As always, if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (Jan. 9, 11:05 a.m.): An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that the uninsured rate among U.S. adults decreased 17.1 percent from a year ago. It is down from last year’s rate of 17.1 percent. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1.4 percent decrease
A study by the Boston University School of Public Health found that a 1 percent increase of beer, wine, and liquor prices through taxes correlated to a 1.4 percent decrease in binge-drinking adults. Wyoming has the lowest beer excise tax in the United States, at a mere 2 cents per gallon, and Tennessee the highest, at $1.17. [The New Republic]

13 teams
The New York Knicks are a dumpster fire. They’re the worst thing to happen to Madison Square Garden since “Godzilla” (1998). Overhydrated toddlers study their game tape to figure out new and innovative ways to wet the bed. They’re terrible. So terrible that not only is almost every team in the NBA certainly superior to them, but the benches of 13 NBA teams are probably better than them too. [FiveThirtyEight]

22 people
In the past week, New York City police officers have appeared to sit back and ignore minor transgressions, seemingly reflecting a conflict between the city’s police department and Mayor Bill de Blasio. In a week one year ago, about 1,400 people were arrested or ticketed for jumping a turnstile in the Subway. This past week, only 22 people were. [The New York Times]

25 megabits per second
FCC Chairman Tom Wheeler is looking to substantially increase the definition of broadband internet — currently set at 4 megabits per second (Mbps) for downloads, 1 Mbps for uploads — to 25 Mbps downstream, 3 Mbps upstream. The definition was last changed in 2010, when “broadband” meant one-20th of what it does today. [Ars Technica]

37 percent decrease
Samsung had a tough year — its operating profit fell about 37 percent in the quarter ending December 2014 compared to the quarter ending December 2013. It’s the fifth consecutive quarter of decline for the world’s top smartphone maker. [The New York Times]

219 years
Age of a time capsule opened Tuesday in Boston. The capsule was placed by Paul Revere and then-Gov. Samuel Adams. Get excited, history buffs: artifacts conservator Pam Hatchfield identified some of the box’s contents as “newspapers,” which as I understand it were fiber-based products developed by people of yore to distribute their blogs. [Boston.com]

796 deaths
According to preliminary BLS data, that’s the number of deaths from construction work in 2013. Latino workers — who are more likely to be undocumented or work for smaller employers — are at increasing risk. [Buzzfeed]

1,200 potential jurors
In order to assemble a jury to try alleged Boston marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, U.S. District Judge George A. O’Toole Jr. summoned 1,200 potential jurors to find 12 — 8 jurors and 4 alternates — who are qualified to serve. Selecting a panel that can evaluate the case without allowing personal bias may prove difficult. [The Boston Globe]

28,000 tons
Mass of expanded polystyrene — plastic foam — that New York City collected in a year. Beginning on July 1, food establishments in the city will be barred from using such containers. If the new ban is anything like the city’s smoking laws, there will be a ton of pushback to begin with, people will probably stop complaining about it after a while, gradually the policy will expand across the country, and 10 years from now the most dedicated New Yorkers will just take a bus to Virginia every four months to buy their take-out food containers in bulk. [The New York Times]

$100 million valuation
The San Francisco-based food replacement startup Soylent has reportedly raised just over $10 million, with a valuation of about $100 million. The company sells a meal replacement shake that purportedly contains all the recommended nutrition a Redditor person needs. [Re/code]

A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here. And, as always, if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (Jan. 8, 11:52 a.m.): An earlier version of this article misstated the year that Godzilla encountered Madison Square Garden. It was 1998, not 1999.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 years
Former Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell was sentenced Tuesday to two years in prison for public corruption. Still, this was considered a win by McDonnell’s attorneys; the sentence is substantially shorter than the 10-year, one-month minimum sought by prosecutors. [NPR]

$10
Cost of a raffle ticket at the Vatican City Post Office, where you can win some of the Pope’s stuff. NBC News reported that Pope Francis is raffling off many of the gifts he has received from world leaders and the faithful. Proceeds will go toward the poor, and a $10 ticket could score you, reportedly, prizes ranging from a four-wheel drive Fiat, an espresso machine, a very nice hat or any one of dozens of other gifts people tried to give the Pope. [NBC News]

44 percent
Percentage of Americans who had only cellular phones in their homes in the first half of 2014, up 3 percent over the previous six months. Looking at kids alone (under 18 years old), 52 percent had no landline. [CDC]

122 movies
What Stephen Soderbergh watched in 2014. [FiveThirtyEight]

164 percent increase
The United States Coast Guard is worried that the defrosting of U.S.-Cuba relations has kicked off an unintended spike in migration from Cuba to the U.S., as Cubans worry the “wet-foot dry-foot” policy, which gives preferential treatments to Cuban immigrants who make it onto American soil, will end soon. Coast Guard interceptions of Cubans attempting to boat to the U.S. were up 164 percent in the second half of December compared to the first half of the month. [NBC News]

470 lightyears
Distance to Kepler 438b, a planet discovered by the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Researchers say it may be the most Earth-like planet outside the solar system found so far. By “Earth-like,” scientists essentially mean “probably rocky,” and “at the ideal distance from a star such that it is neither frozen solid nor on fire.” So don’t bust out the lifeboats quite yet. [The Guardian]

756 people
Number of employees of U.S. Steel that have been laid off. The move follows the idling of two plants that produce piping for oil and gas exploration. The company is coping with demand issues stemming from the recent plunge in oil prices and reduced incentives to drill new wells. [Wall Street Journal]

1,371 luxury cars
The Hoegh Osaka, a container ship that ran aground off the coast of England, may be forced to scrap its cargo, among which is $53 million worth of luxury cars. The ship is carrying one very expensive-sounding Rolls Royce Wraith, which I choose to believe is carrying on a torrid yet doomed romance with one of the Jaguars from steerage as the disaster unfolds. [Business Insider]
“I’ll never let go, Jag.”

87 million euros
A study found soccer star Lionel Messi’s transfer value is 200 million euros, 87 million more than Real Madrid’s Cristiano Ronaldo. In fairness, the Argentinian is known to be impossible. [ESPN FC]

$68 billion
Estimated cost of the California high-speed rail project that first broke ground Tuesday in Fresno, according to experts. The line would connect San Francisco and Los Angeles. The project is due to be completed by 2028, a time at which I sort of assume we’ll already have that Hyperloop thing, or at least a SpaceX flight to Kepler 438b. [Los Angeles Times]

A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here. And, as always, if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
5.9 percent
The flu epidemic is getting worse, with 43 states reporting “high or widespread flu activity.” This year’s flu vaccine has not been as effective as in earlier years, but authorities have stressed people should get vaccinated nonetheless. Hospitalizations from flu-like symptoms are now at 5.9 percent. [ABC 7]

10 percent of clients
Morgan Stanley has fired an employee it says stole — and tried to sell — data on about 350,000 clients of the bank’s wealth management arm (about 10 percent of all the bank’s wealth management customers). The FBI is investigating. [New York Times]

98.7 percent of growth
The homes and communities built around cities during the postwar housing boom have hit the point where they’re beginning to deteriorate, becoming undesirable housing stock. This is threatening inner ring suburbs: 98.7 percent of U.S. population growth between 2000 and 2010 took place beyond a two-mile radius of a downtown center. Roughly 70 percent of the growth took place 15 miles or more away from downtown centers. [Belt Magazine]

$1,200
Sony is out with a new version of the Walkman. This iteration has 128 GB of storage, a touchscreen, high-resolution audio and costs $1,200. I am willing to sell my old Walkman for a tenth of that, but be forewarned that the “No Strings Attached” CD by NSYNC has been stuck in there since 2001. [Gizmodo]

1,364 busted rumors
Gossip Cop, a rumor site with a high bar for whispers, kept track of each busted, debunked and corrected story published in gossip outlets in 2014. The site’s tally of 1,364 false rumors includes details about Robin Williams’s final hours, an alleged relationship of the late actor Philip Seymour Hoffman and the marriage of Channing Tatum. And yet, Gossip Cop has yet to debunk slanderous rumors about a FiveThirtyEight lifestyle writer’s relationship with Bat Boy. [Gossip Cop]

3,000 feet
Two climbers are attempting to complete what is considered the most difficult ascent in the world: the smooth, sheer face of the El Capitan peak in Yosemite National Park. [New York Times]

$15,000
Kyle Craven, who inspired the internet meme Bad Luck Brian, estimated that he has earned between $15,000 and $20,000 over three years from licensing deals and T-shirts. [Washington Post]

$5.2 million
Software in half of New York City taxi cabs caused riders to pay an additional $5.2 million in tips. Bloomberg Businessweek analyzed the distribution of tipping in cabs, and Ben Wellington noticed that tips of 21, 26 and 31 percent were oddly frequent. It turns out the cabs running payment software from Creative Mobile Technologies included tolls and taxes in the pre-tip amount, while the cabs running Verfone tech don’t. In fairness, getting ripped off by a cab at least once is practically a city institution. [I Quant NY]

345,169,134 links
Google was asked to remove 345,169,134 links from its search engine in 2014 by copyright holders with Digital Millennium Copyright Act takedown notices, a 75 percent increase over 2013. This is the worst thing to happen to pirates since Parliament enacted the Offences at Sea Act of 1799. [TorrentFreak]

$2 billion
The Islamic State claimed it has an annual budget of $2 billion for 2015, and will enjoy a $250 million surplus. The group pays its fighters $400 per month. [International Business Times]

A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here. And, as always, if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 seconds
As automakers start adding tablets to vehicles, they’re trying to keep in mind a voluntary guideline from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: Limit any single interaction with a car’s technology to two seconds or less. At 60 mph, a car travels 176 feet in 2 seconds (or about the time it takes to put Miley Cyrus on repeat). [New York Times]

75 percent
France’s two-year-old tax rate on the nation’s highest earners is set to expire at the end of the month. Earnings over 1 million euros — roughly $1.2 million — were taxed at a whopping 75 percent rate. I have been unable to get a picture of a smiling Grover Norquist in a beret out of my head. [Reuters]

76 Matthews
An analysis of IMDb data found a relative paucity of heroic characters named Matt or Matthew on TV and in movies. There were just 156 Matts and 76 Matthews, despite Matthew ranking in the top 5 male names in every year from 1981 to 2006. Other common names, such as Jack or David, are equally common in TV and film. But as a Walter, I urge Matts to stop whining. [Medium]

200 fundraisers
A former adviser to Mike Huckabee said the former Arkansas governor would have to do between 200 and 300 fundraisers to amass the estimated $150 million needed to win the GOP nomination for president in 2016. [The Washington Post]

7:52 CST
Jan. 4 is the busiest day for online dating websites, according to data from Match.com and Plenty of Fish, with yearly traffic peaking sometime between 5 p.m. and 8 p.m. Match.com said the peak time for its traffic was 7:52 p.m. CST. [Quartz]

$2,500
Estimated cost of doing CrossFit for one year in Manhattan, compared to about $6,000 per year doing SoulCycle four times a week. On the other hand, my daily fitness routine, eating a wheel of brie while watching Netflix, only costs about $800 per year. [New York Magazine]

150,000 acres
Poppy cultivation has almost tripled in Myanmar since 2006, as farmers turn to producing the in-demand and portable crop over others, such as coffee, which can take three years to produce beans. Close to 150,000 acres are devoted to poppy production. [The New York Times]

$245,340
That’s the average cost for a middle-income family to raise a child born in 2013 until age 18. Education and child care have both become much more expensive. Still, as with most things in the United States, it’s cheaper-per-unit to buy in bulk — the average cost for each subsequent child decreases. [Vox]

$300,000
Average cost to produce an hourlong episode of a true-crime reenactment for the rapidly growing Investigation Discovery network. The pulpy shows — such as “Momsters: When Moms Go Bad” and “Wives With Knives” — are cheap to make, with scripts ripped from the headlines, allowing the network to crank out 700 hours of original content per year. [New York Times]

$9.69 billion
Movies released in 2014 made $9,690,909,381, according to Box Office Mojo, the lowest haul since 2011. [Box Office Mojo]

A Significant Digits daily newsletter is coming soon. If you want to be one of the first to receive it, sign up here. And, as always, if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
13 years in prison
The sentence for a wealthy real estate developer convicted in China of buying and eating 3 tigers. The man was also fined 1.55 million yuan (almost $250,000). Trafficking has decimated the tiger population, which has dropped from about 100,000 a century ago to 3,000 today. [The Straits Times]

19 accidents
The number of plane crashes in 2014, according to the Aviation Safety Network. The count, which is below the 10-year average, looks at incidents with 14 people or more, and disregards two crashes — Malaysia Airlines flight MH17, which was shot down over Ukraine, and the AirAsia crash this past weekend. Air safety statistics are varied and often disagree. [The Verge]

28 detainees
Five Guantanamo Bay detainees were released to Kazakhstan, the Defense Department announced Tuesday. This year, 28 detainees have been transferred to other countries, including Uruguay and Afghanistan, the largest number since 2009. There are still 127 detainees who remain in the prison. [New York Times]

50 percent of films
An analysis found that 15 of 30 animated releases by DreamWorks Pictures were “fueled by hyperactive talking animals.” Thanks to the hacking of Sony Pictures, the poor performance of DreamWorks in 2014 mostly went unremarked upon in the media. The studio had a rough year, with two major releases failing to meeting box office expectations. [The Daily Dot]

51 percent of devices
Apple won Christmas, representing 51 percent of device activations in the week leading up to Dec. 25. The company’s success may be buoyed by the rising share of “phablets,” or phones the size of small tablets, such as the iPhone 6 Plus. Phablets exploded in popularity this Christmas, tripling their share of activations compared to last year. More people activated a phablet than activated full-sized or small tablets. [Quartz]

58 percent
The market share for Internet Explorer. Microsoft is reportedly working on a new browser, code named Spartan, to be offered when Windows 10 is released. Internet Explorer has a 2 percent market share on mobile. Call your parents (or grandparents) and alert them that other browsers exist. Together, we can make a better internet in 2015. [Wired]{

60 percent
In a typical year, the flu vaccine is effective at reducing diseases with flu-like symptoms by about 60 percent. But the CDC announced this season’s flu outbreak has not been typical, reaching epidemic levels. The vaccine’s effectiveness this year may be about 40 percent. Widespread cases are not yet reported in New York, but in any event I urge you to please refrain from licking the handrails on the subway for the time being. [CBS News, via @theZorb]

126 officers
In 2014, 126 law enforcement officers were killed on duty, compared to 102 in 2013. [New York Times]

2:15 a.m.
That’s when George Stephanopoulos wakes up every day to host Good Morning America, one of many morning talk show hosts to greet the day just as this writer is about to crash. Savannah Guthrie of “The Today Show” wakes up at 3 a.m., and co-anchor Matt Lauer is up by 4 a.m.. [New York Times]

$1 billion
That’s how much oil tycoon Harold Hamm was ordered last month to pay his ex-wife following the largest divorce settlement in U.S. history. Hamm’s $19 billion fortune has fallen by half after an oil price crash, and he’s since appealed the ruling. Hamm holds a 68 percent stake in Continental Resources, the top driller in the North Dakota’s oil boom. This is why I personally don’t invest in volatile commodities like oil, and instead invest in online shopping, Seamless orders and late night saki. [Reuters]

4
Days before the next Significant Digits, and, coincidentally, also the number of cases of champagne at the New Year’s Eve party I’m attending tonight. We’re off until next Monday. Have a happy new year, stay safe and if you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 years of rent
The 26-year-old English singer Jessie J reported she was able to live comfortably for more than three years on the earnings from writing a single song, Miley Cyrus’s 2009 hit “Party In The USA.” [ET]

34 percent of parents
According to a survey conducted by Netflix, 87 percent of parents are spending New Year’s Eve with their children. And 34 percent of parents plan to fool their children into thinking it’s the new year before the clock actually strikes midnight. Netflix intends to aid in this temporal façade, with a lemur-themed countdown parents can stream at any point in the evening. [CNN]

$299
Attention masochists! For a mere $299, you can spend your New Year’s Eve in the Times Square TGI Fridays. Amenities include appetizers, a dinner buffet and an open bar of TGI Friday’s specialty drinks. [Gothamist]

4,900 tons of burning money
The Philadelphia Federal Reserve is tasked with getting rid of old paper bills that are too worn out. My sensible solution — place the unusable bills by vending machines on K Street in Washington in an effort to cut down on lobbying — has yet to gain traction. Instead, the Fed has invented a way to recycle the discarded bills into energy by sending them to local power plants to be burned for electricity. [Gizmodo]

7,842 deaths
The World Health Organization announced that the Ebola outbreak has killed more than 7,842 people in Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea. At the moment, though, most people are focused on a single case in Scotland. [Turkish Press]

$11,000 processing fee
The fee to obtain a vanity address in the City of New York, which allows developers to choose a luxury address for their new buildings — for instance, the forthcoming “432 Park Ave” located on 56th street. A Park Avenue address is worth 5 to 10 percent more than a comparable apartment on an adjacent side street, because real estate makes no sense in this godforsaken city. I never thought it would be possible to make a grid system complicated. [Bloomberg Businessweek]

58,913
The number of homeless people in New York City, a record high. [WNYC]

$24 million
Placing a lot trust in an organization notorious for dropping players who have passed maximum efficiency, New England Patriots quarterback Tom Brady restructured his contract to give the franchise $24 million back to spend during the off-season. Brady can now be released at any time without any liability. [ESPN]

30 million unauthorized downloads
“Frozen” and “The Wolf of Wall Street” top the list of most-pirated films of the past year, with 30 million downloads by torrent users. The fact that the top five illegally downloaded films of 2014 were all released in 2013 is — if anything — a grim reminder of how terrible most movies were this year. [Variety]

$82.5 million
Revenue in fiscal year ending December 2013 for rapidly expanding burger chain Shake Shack, which filed for an initial public offering Monday. The chain has 63 restaurants according to the report, one of which essentially turned New York’s Madison Square Park into an elaborate line that would haunt the most hardened DMV veteran’s nightmares. [Business Insider]

If you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

$1.39
The fee self-published authors received in November for one digital “borrow” of their book on Amazon’s Kindle Unlimited. The all-you-can-read service, which costs $9.99 per month, has reportedly hurt writers who rely on the e-commerce giant for income. For standard ebook sales, Amazon typically gives writers 70 percent of a book’s earnings. [New York Times]

50 minute drive
How far a Twitter user drove on Christmas to get into an offline fight with another Twitter user over Kobe Bryant. Because one party in the argument was remotely rational, the fight did not occur. [SB Nation]

440 letters of support
Former Virginia Gov. Bob McDonnell, who was convicted on public corruption charges in September, has amassed 440 letters of support from former colleagues, friends and family members seeking leniency at his Jan. 6 sentencing. McDonnell could face more than ten years in prison, but his attorneys — and supporters — are hoping for a community service sentence. In one letter, McDonnell’s daughter Caitlin blamed the crimes that led to her father’s downfall on her mother. [Washington Post]

510 pardons
California Gov. Jerry Brown announced 105 pardons on Christmas Day, mostly for people convicted of minor drug offenses. Brown has given out 510 pardons since he took office in 2011. The three governors who preceded him in office granted a combined 29 pardons over 20 years. [Los Angeles Times]

1,175 civilians
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said that in the past six months the Islamic State has killed 1,175 civilians. In addition, the group has killed 120 of its own members, mostly foreign fighters seeking to return home. [Al Jazeera]

1,434 Wal-Marts
Minimum wage hikes in 21 states will affect base salaries at roughly one-third of Wal-Mart’s stores. Employees in South Dakota will see the biggest jump, as the state raised the minimum 17 percent to $8.50 per hour. I’m going to assume this means I can once again shop at Wal-Mart guilt-free. [Reuters]

58,000 college students
That’s the estimate from Free Application for Federal Student Aid data for the number of homeless college students in the United States during the 2012-2013 academic year. [The Huffington Post]

$15 million
How much “The Interview,” which was released on video-on-demand streaming services Tuesday afternoon, made through Saturday. The film also earned $2.8 million in 300 theaters. The film — in which the guys from “Pineapple Express” try to kill North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un — was downloaded more than 2 million times. The budget for the film was about $40 million, so hopefully Sony has learned the valuable lesson about fronting money to potheads that the rest of us learned in college. [Variety, Huffington Post]

$48 million, 6 years
The rumored contract Jim Harbaugh, who just parted ways with the San Francisco 49ers, will sign to coach the University of Michigan football team. If confirmed, the contract would make Harbaugh the highest-paid college football coach in the country. It’s unclear when Harbaugh will go to Michigan, but — knowing San Franciscans — I can say it’s entirely dependent on when Uber surge pricing ends. [Bleacher Report]

$179,227,702,248
Starting with $1,000 on Jan. 1, that’s how much money someone would have had by Dec. 23 if they had played the stock market perfectly in 2014. Granted, this kind of performance is infinitesimally unlikely — basically alternate-timeline Biff Tannen levels of financial decision-making — but assuming an investor picked the best performing stock of the S&P 500 each day, they could’ve become the richest person on earth in mid-December. Better luck next year. [Quartz]

If you see a significant digit out in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey. 
