
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. It’s Guest Week here at this column, which means a cavalcade of FiveThirtyEight writers has agreed to keep you numerate. Today’s guest writer: @ollie.

1 minute, 15 seconds
IBM’s Watson — our computer overlord that was welcomed in 2011 by Ken Jennings on “Jeopardy!” — is now in the movie business. The artificially intelligent Watson helped cut a 1 minute, 15 second trailer for 20th Century Fox’s upcoming horror flick “Morgan.” Using visual and audio analyses, the system identified moments from the film that were especially frightening, and a human editor spliced them into a comprehensible preview. [TechCrunch]

150 hours of commercials
Television commercials are an indelible part of childhood. Whether it’s cowboys obsessed with picante sauce, the virtues of savory microwavable pastries, or hallucinogenic zebra gum, TV ads are the gooey medium that is still the mortar for my fragile, 30-something psyche. However, a troubling new study from Exstreamist estimates that today’s children are spared 150 hours of commercials a year, thanks to streaming services such as Netflix and Hulu. I weep for the future. [Engadget]

178 years later
In 1838, Jesuit priests sold 272 slaves to shore up the struggling finances of Georgetown University. Yesterday the university announced a plan to offer preferential status in admissions to the descendants of the slaves whose forced labor benefited (and physically built) the school. The recompense will also include a formal apology, a new institute for the study of slavery, and renamed campus buildings — but no financial assistance. [The New York Times]

2,271 words
If you sign up to volunteer making phone calls for the Donald Trump campaign, you might want to retain counsel. Would-be volunteers are required to sign an unusual 2,271-word non-disclosure agreement. Among its stipulations: A volunteer must promise not to disparage Trump “during the term of your service and at all times thereafter.” For-ev-er. [The Cincinnati Enquirer]

$143 million
Hillary Clinton’s august August fundraisers garnered $143 million for her campaign and the Democratic Party, more than any month so far this cycle. She’s had better luck than me in the Hamptons. The last time I was there, Paul McCartney was conspicuously absent, I danced alone and all I took home was a sunburn. [The Washington Post]

$915.6 million
It’s summertime, but the livin’ isn’t so easy for Hollywood. Summer typically generates about 40 percent of yearly moviegoing sales, but this year, of the 32 movies released by the six major studios, 17 of them lost a combined $915.6 million. It might be time to ask Watson if it knows how to direct. [Bloomberg]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey — he’ll be back next week.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. It’s Guest Week here at this column, which means a cavalcade of FiveThirtyEight writers has agreed to keep you numerate. Today’s guest writer: @skepticalsports.

4.4 kilometers
Remember that time we landed a probe on a comet? Well, we’re doing it again! The Rosetta mission is coming to a close, and the Rosetta orbiter should join its companion Philae as residents of the 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko comet at the end of September. Rosetta came within 4.4 kilometers of the comet during its most recent approach. You can follow Rosetta’s progress here. [The Planetary Society]

16 of 24
Field goals converted from 50 or more yards at the half-way point in the Canadian Football League this year. In 2015, they made 19 all season. In 2014, they made seven. (It’s almost as if kickers are getting better.) [TSN]

30 of 38
Wins in one-run games by the Texas Rangers this season. Their .789 winning percentage in such games would be the highest of all time. [FiveThirtyEight]

100 percent
Odds that Mexico will pay for the “great wall” Donald Trump wants to build between the U.S. and Mexico, according to Donald Trump. Or possibly the share of the cost that Mexico will pay — I can’t really tell. Maybe Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto can shed some light for us. [Los Angeles Times]

100 percent
How former WWE champion Daniel Bryan feels about his health and readiness to return to the ring after retiring because of concussion-related symptoms. But he totally definitely for real isn’t coming back to wrestle Brock Lesnar at Wreslemania 33. [ESPN]

3,700-million years
Age of microbial fossils discovered by Australian geologists in Greenland. (And yes, they say “3,700-million,” not 3.7 billion. Because science.) This means life may have evolved even earlier than we previously thought, and may be even more common than we previously thought. Which, if you believe in the Great Filter, is very bad news. [The Washington Post]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @ollie— he’ll be your host Friday.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. It’s Guest Week here at this column, which means a cavalcade of FiveThirtyEight writers has agreed to keep you numerate. Today’s guest writer: @jodyavirgan.

0 percent
A new PPP survey has found a 0 percent favorable rating for Donald Trump among African-American voters. [The Hill]

$7.79
About eight bucks will buy you the new “Dakburger,” at Snuffer’s, a Dallas-area restaurant chain. The burger is named after Dak Prescott, the Dallas Cowboys’ rookie quarterback who fans are desperately deluding themselves into thinking is their savior by doing things like naming a burger after him. [Dallas News]

111 prisoners
President Obama shortened the prison sentences of 111 inmates Tuesday, most of them nonviolent drug offenders who would receive much lighter sentences were they convicted today. Obama has now granted 673 commutations, more than the past 10 presidents combined. [NPR]

444 runs
Here’s how the BBC puts it: “Alex Hales struck a record 171 and Jos Buttler made England’s fastest ever 50 from 22 balls as England hit 444-3.” And here’s my translation: 444 is the highest ever score in a one-day cricket match. And I guess Alex Hales is really, really good. [BBC]

$2 billion
How much is it worth to have the U.S. government as a customer? For the private prison industry, at least $2 billion. After the Department of Justice announced it would no longer use private prison companies for federal inmates, and after the Department of Homeland Security said it was also looking into ending its use of private detention centers, two private prison companies lost over $2 billion in value. [Quartz]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @skepticalsports— he’ll be your host Thursday.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. It’s Guest Week here at this column, which means a cavalcade of FiveThirtyEight writers has agreed to keep you numerate. Today’s guest writer: @blytheterrell.

1 in 300
A new study out of the University of Texas Medical Branch shows that female Aedes aegypti mosquitoes can pass the Zika virus to their offspring, which is not great news. The researchers found that it was no sure thing, however — the virus was passed down at a rate of 1 in 300 mosquitoes. But that could still be a problem because mosquito populations are pretty huge. [STAT]

$56
Well, dear readers, we now know the price of a New York minute. It’s 56 bucks, which is about how much more New Yorkers will pay per month in rent, on average, to live one single minute closer by subway to Manhattan’s business districts. After you shelled out the cash, what would you do with your extra minute? Sleep in? Linger over your oatmeal with a loved one? Toss in another $56 a month to avoid a tongue lashing from Kevin Spacey? Choose wisely. [FiveThirtyEight]

83 years
Actor Gene Wilder died Monday at age 83. Rest in peace, Mr. Wilder. You’ll always be Willy Wonka to me. [The New York Times]

97.8 percent
Canada brought back its mandatory long-form census this year (in case you needed a data-related reason to love Justin Trudeau), and the response rate was an impressive 97.8 percent. The overall response rate for both the long and short versions was 98.4 percent. CBC News quoted chief statistician Wayne Smith as saying this year’s census was the “best census since 1666.” [CBC News, h/t @JordanElder]

300+ dead reindeer
A couple of you tweeted me the weird story of the more than 300 reindeer that were killed by lightning at a national park in Norway. You already made the angry Santa jokes, so instead I’ll say that I hope the hallucinogenic shrooms took the edge off. [National Geographic]

HD164595
Back in May 2015, a radio telescope in Russia detected a signal from star HD164595, which is a cool 95 light-years away and is about the same size as our sun. It’s kind of unclear why no one said anything until now; the scientists who recorded it attracted attention when they gave a talk about the signal. And it’s way, way too early to say whether this is a sign of extraterrestrial life. That said, if it is the SETI Institute has protocols in place for what it believes should happen next. [The Guardian]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @jodyavirgan — he’ll be your host Wednesday.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. It’s Guest Week here at this column, which means a cavalcade of FiveThirtyEight writers has agreed to keep you numerate. Today’s guest writer: @ollie.

6 people
Six people have just emerged from a 20-foot tall, 36-foot in diameter dome in Hawaii after a year in isolation. They were there helping NASA plan for a mission to Mars. I, meanwhile, have spent two years in a 200-square-foot New York apartment, emerging only occasionally for sandwiches from the corner bodega. NASA: Call me. [Guardian]

12 seconds
A typical NASCAR pitstop takes about 12 seconds. That’s several seconds faster than the typical pitstop in the early 2000s. Former college baseball, basketball and football athletes are increasingly being recruited into auto racing, and perfecting the complex, physically demanding ballet that is competitive auto maintenance. [The New Yorker]

30-hour workweek
Amazon, which has sometimes been criticized for its break-neck work culture, is experimenting with a few technical teams of part-time, 30-hour-a-week workers. The teams will work from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., plus “flex hours,” and garner the same benefits as full-time employees. There’s a hope that the arrangement could attract more female employees, who tend to shoulder more household and child-care responsibilities. [The Washington Post]

55 percent chance
Over the next two weeks, thousands will descend upon the Flushing neighborhood of Queens, New York, to sit in bleachers, wear shorts, sweat all over each other and drink vodka cocktails. There will also be a major tennis tournament taking place. It’s a tournament — the U.S. Open — that Serena Williams has a 55 percent chance to win, according to our predictions. It would be Williams’s 23rd major, an Open-era record. The favorite on the men’s side is Novak Djokovic, with a 57 percent shot at the championship. [FiveThirtyEight]

6.2 million dead butterflies
Storms in Mexico earlier this year brought unusual rain, cold and wind, destroying 133 acres of forest and killing 6.2 million monarch butterflies that were wintering there. That’s over 7 percent of the 84 million butterflies that winter in the area. Last December, they covered some 10 acres. That’s up from their record-low 1.7 acres in 2013, but down from the 44 acres they covered 20 years ago. [The Weather Channel]

130 million ash trees
The emerald ash borer is killing trees and causing major problems. The borers, small green beetles, have infected 130 million ash trees in about 6 million acres of New York forest. Beyond the ecological devastation, the insects could have a significant effect in the world of sport. While maple, for example, has been increasing in popularity in baseball, about a quarter of major league bats are made out of white ash. [The New York Times]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @blytheterrell—she’ll be your host tomorrow.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

1 box of crickets
Did you know that any honest American subway car is a mere box full of crickets away from complete and utter catastrophe at any given time? This theorem was demonstrated to devastating effect Wednesday evening in New York City, on a D train going over the Manhattan Bridge. A woman was trying to sell crickets and worms to people on the train, because sure, why not, the history of capitalism is chock-full of innovators who not only discovered but created markets. Anyway, this pitch flops, and then a bunch of teenagers — because of course it’s teenagers — pushed her, leading the small businesswoman to dump the box full of crickets and worms in the car, I don’t know, maybe to demonstrate the vitality of the stock. So everybody freaks out, obviously, the crickets are just everywhere, and some wannabe Moses tries to end the plague by deciding to pull the emergency brake, which means that the train is stuck on the bridge for half an hour rather than proceeding to its eventual destination. [The New York Post, via John Carney]

3 tablespoons white pepper
An heir to Colonel Sanders may have given the super secret recipe for the notorious eleven herbs and spices in the KFC batter to a reporter, which is the one thing you’re not supposed to do. The key is apparently white pepper. You need 3 tablespoons of it. [The New York Times]

5 percent
Some scientists put a bunch of kids on standing desks and then compared them to a control group. It’s one study, with only 400 participants, and found a slight (5 percent) change in BMI of the standing desk kids, which obviously means it’s time to overhaul our entire educational system to make sure everyone is using a standing desk. Of course the researcher behind it founded a standing desk company for schools. [Bloomberg]

21 percent
According to a study published in American Journal of Public Health,  consumption of soda decreased 21 percent a year after the city of Berkeley implemented a soda tax. Fittingly, we found out about this news from [Bloomberg].

38 percent
Percentage of Americans who believed the Federal Reserve was doing a good or excellent job in November of 2014, compared to 53 percent who said as much in 2003. Golly, I wonder what might have shaken their faith. [The Wall Street Journal]

1964
That’s the year that Farc began its fight against the Colombian state. Wednesday the two sides announced a peace deal, which would be certified after an October 2 plebiscite. [The Guardian]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

15 minutes
In August, Priorities USA Action, the super PAC backing Hillary Clinton’s bid for the presidency, has aired advertisements at the rate of one ad every 15 minutes in Florida and one every 17 minutes in Ohio. [The Center For Public Integrity]

163 percent
Increase in the number of cases of syphilis in London since 2010. The disease is spreading rapidly. [The Guardian]

671 percent
Pay increase for Heather Bresch over the past 9 years. Bresch is the CEO of Mylan, the pharmaceutical company that’s in the news for hiking the price of several drugs including the EpiPen. Given that people with certain allergies need EpiPens in order to not die in agony of anaphylactic shock, people are understandably miffed at Mylan for raising the price from $56.64 in 2007 to $317.82 today. [The Guardian]

3,964
Number of copies of Donald Trump’s book “Crippled America” that the Trump campaign bought from a New York Barnes & Noble on May 10. The purchases juiced the sales to the point that the tome was on the Nielsen bestseller list. This is not precisely kosher: If Trump profited from the sales, that could be a violation of federal campaign finance law. [The Daily Beast]

436,484 voters
Much has been made of an increase in Republican Party registrations and a potential buoying effect it could have on the Trump campaign. Registration for Democrats has dropped since 2012 in a number of key swing states, but a close look at voter registration figures led my colleague David Wasserman to conclude that those losses haven’t generally translated into gains for the GOP. Florida, for example, has added 436,484 voters since 2012, but nonwhites — who tend not to support Donald Trump — account for 76 percent of the new voters. [FiveThirtyEight]

40 trillion kilometers
Good news everyone: Scientists found a new planet orbiting Proxima Centauri, the closest star to our solar system at 40 trillion kilometers away. Sure, we will all almost definitely be dead by the time we manage to send something there, but still it’s pretty neat. [BBC]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

99L
Invest 99L is an area of disturbed weather in the Eastern Caribbean that could become a tropical storm named Hermine if it grows in strength. Its proximity to states on the Gulf coast has NOAA already sending out aircraft to investigate. [FiveThirtyEight]

$356.01
Amount paid to the speechwriter behind Melania Trump’s RNC speech — portions of which were plagiarized from Michelle Obama’s 2008 speech at the DNC — by the Trump campaign. [The Hill]

$1,040,000
CRIME OF THE CENTURY: Two men were arrested in Brooklyn after allegedly stealing 2,000 boxes of frozen imported eel worth $1,040,000. [ABC 7 New York]

11 million pounds of cheese
The USDA will spend about $20 million on 11 million pounds of cheese to get to food banks and help the domestic cheese industry deal with its largest surplus in 30 years. [USDA via Alex Fitzpatrick]

$25.5 million
How much Oregon has collected in taxation on recreational marijuana since January, which given the state’s sales tax of 25 percent on the bud means that Oregonians smoked about $102 million worth of legal weed so far this year. [Oregon Live]

$675 million
Sales at Jersey Mike’s Subs last year, the fastest growing food chain in the United States. Sandwiches are having the same kind of disruption that the burger business has seen, with the rise of fast-casual subsuming parts of the market previously occupied by fast food. [Bloomberg]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

4 lost sponsorships
It has been a trying week for Ryan Lochte, the U.S. Olympic swimmer who said he got mugged but really did not get mugged in Rio. He has lost at least four sponsorships, from Speedo, Ralph Lauren, Gentle Hair Removal and Airweave. [Mashable]

15 percent
Draft Kings and Fan Duel will be allowed to operate in New York State this football season, thanks to legislation passed in June that throws a 15 percent tax on revenues on the companies. [Democrat & Chronicle]

17 percent
The final numbers are in: Olympic viewership was down 17 percent on NBC compared to the London games, and already everyone is blaming the youths rather than the corporations that failed to find a way to reach them. [Bloomberg]

75 percent
Percentage of music sales in Japan that are physical CDs and vinyl, which is absurd. The Japanese market for music is completely unlike any other, and weirdly enough it’s because they had all the good technology — camera phones, 3G, et cetera — before everyone else. [Quartz]

1,500
My fellow Americans, the operation has failed: A flotilla invasion force into Canada — comprising mainly participants in the Port Huron Float Down — has failed, with 1,500 Americans captured and also rescued by the Sarnia police, the Ontario Provincial Police, the Canadian Coast Guard, Canada Border Service Agency and some people who happened to work nearby after they were blown on to the Canadian shore during the fun date out on the river. Thanks, neighbor. [CBC]

202,370
Number of posts on Gawker.com by the reckoning of one of their data analysts. Yesterday evening the blog shut down, litigated into the ground by Hulk Hogan and venture capitalist with several weird thoughts about a whole bunch of stuff Peter Thiel. Univision bought the other Gawker properties. [Kinja]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

8 percent
Percentage of global energy demand that goes to chemical plants. Right now in order to make plastics — and I’m glossing over the nuances of the process — you have to freeze and heat and freeze and heat hydrocarbons to isolate the needed building blocks. Exxon Mobile and Georgia Tech have developed a new technique that could cut some of that energy-intensive process and save a whole lot of money and prevent a whole lot of carbon dioxide from getting into the atmosphere. [Bloomberg]

27 gold medals
While the U.S. has been on top for the Summer Olympics in Rio, the U.K. has had a massive year as well, taking 27 golds, 23 silvers and 17 bronze medals for second overall in the count. [The Guardian]

$4.6 million
Amount raised by the National Republican Campaign Committee in July, which is a huge drop from fundraising numbers — $9.3 million — in June. The Democratic counterpart raised $12 million in July. [The Wall Street Journal]

$6.8 million
Matt Bissonnette will forfeit $6.8 million in royalties and speaking fees derived from his book, “No Easy Day,” which concerned the raid that killed Osama bin Laden but was not vetted by the Pentagon prior to publication. [The New York Times]

$11.4 million
The “Ben-Hur” remake cost $100 million dollars but crapped the bed at the box office, taking in a mere $11.4 million in its opening weekend at the box office. [Variety]

$20.7 billion
According to the Baton Rouge Area Chamber, that’s the value of the approximately 110,000 homes that may have flooded during the recent disaster in the area. [The Advocate]

You really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
