
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

6 quarters
Whole Foods is closing stores in several states after six consecutive quarters of declining sales. The issue? In part, it’s because other super markets have begun to imitate what people liked about Whole Foods. No matter the cause, foot traffic is down, and some analysts see an acquirer in the company’s future. [The Guardian]

8 years
The alleged mastermind behind a Canadian maple syrup heist has been sentenced to eight years in prison with a $9.4 million fine. I envy what the rest of the continent is reading as their front-page news these days. [CBC]

15 no’s
A bill to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act is in its last-ditch push before the GOP loses the ability to pass it by majority vote in the Senate. In the U.S. House, over 15 G.O.P. lawmakers have said they would not vote for the current bill, and Speaker Paul Ryan can only afford to lose 22 votes in total. [POLITICO]

19 pounds
Amidst food shortages, civic unrest and a catastrophic economic collapse, the average Venezuelan adult lost 19 pounds last year. [Bloomberg]

352 people
Since operations against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria began in 2014, at least 352 civilians have been killed in U.S.-led strikes. That’s the Pentagon’s tally; outside groups place the number of deaths an order of magnitude higher. [Reuters]

$1 trillion
A bipartisan agreement over a $1 trillion U.S. budget bill was reached over the weekend. The budget does not contain any new funding for a wall along the Mexican border, a blow to President Donald Trump’s policy priorities. [The Guardian]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

No. 1
The NFL Draft began last night in Philadelphia — a city known for its sports fans, its history and its historically violent sports fan drunks — and man did they deliver. Myles Garrett, a defensive end out of Texas A&M, was selected by Cleveland as the No. 1 pick in the draft. [ESPN]

4 executions
In a relentless sprint of death before the expiration of its lethal injection reserves, Arkansas has killed its fourth death row inmate in eight days. [NPR]

40
Mina Guli, an Australian ultra-marathon runner, is trying to complete 40 marathons in 40 days. She is attempting the masochistic feat to draw attention to dwindling water supplies. [BBC]

78 percent
Share of technology workers who had voluntarily left their jobs who said they had experienced “unfair behavior or treatment” in the course of their work. [The Guardian]

16,386 times
A Texas judge ruled that Exxon Mobil should pay $20 million in fines after violating the Clean Air Act 16,386 times from 2005 to 2013 at a refinery outside Houston. [CNN Money]

$35.7 billion
Amazon posted first-quarter sales of $35.7 billion, up 23 percent from a year earlier. Net income was $724 million, or two percent of sales, because Amazon is a company that operates on a totally different plane than normal companies that need to post a big profit to see their stock do what Amazon’s does. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

11
Number of current and former employees of Fox News who have signed onto a class-action lawsuit against the company alleging racial discrimination. [The New York Times]

11 of 18
Humans, as a rule, aren’t good at surviving in space, so we invented space suits. Those suits are pricey, and resilient, but they don’t last forever. The 18 spacewalking backpacks originally developed are now down to 11, and NASA is trying to deal with its rapidly aging closet of spacesuits. [AP News]

70 percent
Close to 70 percent of NFL players are black, according to an annual study published by The Institute for Diversity and Ethics in Sport. The racial makeup of the league varies significantly by position: 12.5 percent of running backs were white in 2014, compared to 97.8 percent of kickers and punters. The reasons for these disparities are myriad. [The Undefeated]

$1,077
Average monetary ransom demanded by malicious phishing software in 2016, according to a report from Symantec Corp. That’s up substantially from $294 in 2015. [Reuters]

2,400
More than 40 colleges and other organizations have seen their applications for Upward Bound grants rejected by the Department of Education in recent weeks, in many cases because of minor formatting errors on the application such as failing to double space. Those programs offer tutoring and counseling services to nearly 2,400 low-income high-school students. [The Chronicle of Higher Education]

373,807
Number of jobs in the solar power sector in 2016, according to the Energy Information Administration, compared with 398,235 in the natural gas industry and 160,119 in the coal business. [The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1
A North Carolina audit found that of the 4,769,640 votes cast in November, only 1 would probably have been tossed out as a fraudulent vote under the voter ID law the state passed in 2013. The law was struck down by a federal court, which found it clearly targeted black voters. [The Charlotte Observer]

$4
China has begun selling cheap HIV testing kits out of vending machines around university campuses. The discrete $4 exams are anonymous and could help stem infections on campuses without the social stigma of getting a V.D. check at the clinic. [NPR]

57
Number of F-35 fighter jets that Pentagon officials estimate manufacturer Lockheed Martin will deliver in 2017, nine fewer than the company plans. [Bloomberg]

128 years
A wall along the Mexican border would have immense consequences, not the least of which has to do with the flows of water across the arid border. That’s such a fraught and essential element of U.S.-Mexico relations that we’ve had the International Boundary and Water Commission for the past 128 years to hash it all out. If the President’s proposed border wall ever become a reality, it could violate the 47-year-old treaty that divvies up the Rio Grande. [NPR]

636,000 viewers
Average Fox News viewers in the key 25-54 demographic at 8 p.m. on Monday, which is pretty normal. It was Tucker Carlson’s first show in the time slot long dominated by Bill O’Reilly, who was unceremoniously sacked last week. Tucker’s ratings seemed to suggest that the network — at least for now — doesn’t need O’Reilly to keep eyeballs around. Still, this is a number to watch very closely over the next few months. [CNN]

$3.1 million
Lobbying expenditures in the first three months of the year from Koch Industries, which weighed in on the EPA’s Clean Power Plan as well as President Trump’s nominees in their Senate confirmation processes. [The Intercept]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 day
The U.K. saw its first full day of coal-free electricity since its first coal-fired generator came online in 1882 last Thursday. The longest Britain had gone without burning coal to keep the lights on was a 19 hour stint last year. [BBC]

20 percent
Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross announced new tariffs averaging 20 percent on Canadian softwood lumber. The move escalates a trade dispute with Canada, which according to Ross accounts for about 31.5 percent of the U.S. lumber market. [Yahoo Finance]

43 percent
Share of Americans who approve of President Trump’s handling of the economy, according to a new Marketplace-Edison Research poll. [Marketplace]

1,300 kilometers
A 12-year-old boy who was trying to drive (alone) across Australia made it 1,300 kilometers before being stopped by police. [9News]

$3 million
According to reports, Square Inc. bought up the remaining engineering team of the app Yik Yak for the fire-sale price of less than $3 million. The once-hot social network was built on the idea that people would enjoy having anonymous conversations with people close by. That’s a fantastic concept until you remember that “anonymous internet person” and “by definition near you” are scary as hell in practice. [Bloomberg]

$729.6 billion
Contribution of arts and culture to the U.S. economy, if you’re the kind of boring stiff who needs the spice of life boiled down to an economic figure. That’s 4.2 percent of the economy, you ruthless automaton. [Arts.gov]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 percent
Under the Dodd-Frank financial-regulation law, investors can submit shareholder resolutions provided that they own $2,000 worth of stock in a company, or 1 percent, whichever is lower. A bill in Congress now would remove that $2,000 option, substantially raising the burden for introducing resolutions, which investors have used to push for changes at companies. [International Business Times]

20
The Washington Post examined the voter registrations of 395 members of Congress and found at least 20 of them do not live in the district they represent. This isn’t necessarily a huge issue — members are only required to live in the same state, not the same district, and the redistricting process means people’s homes can be cut out of the district they have long represented — but it can be used as an election-season cudgel by opponents. [The Washington Post]

23.9 percent
With an estimated 23.9 percent of the vote, independent centrist Emmanuel Macron won the first round of the French presidential election, scooping up endorsements from the right and left for his second-round effort. The cross-party unity is in part because with 21.4 percent of the vote, the far-right Nationalist Front candidate Marine Le Pen also made that runoff. [The New York Times]

34 percent
Share of Americans who approve of President Donald Trump giving top government jobs to his son-in-law and daughter; 61 percent of respondents to an ABC News poll said they disapproved . Nepotism still doesn’t go over well, regardless of what people think of a president overall. [ABC News]

40 percent
People are living longer, which means they’re more likely to get cancer in the long run because they’re not dying of other stuff. In the U.S., experts estimate we’re going to need about 40 percent more oncologists by 2025 to meet eventual demand. Shortfalls are likely in the near future, so this is a problem that needs to be addressed as soon as possible. [Nautilus]

90,000
A blackout affecting almost 90,000 customers in San Francisco was caused by a fire in a utility substation. The outage hit the financial and technology district in the city on Friday. [Reuters]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

4 inches
Relative sea level rise in South Florida since 1992. But property owners in South Florida aren’t so much worried that the sea will flood their homes anytime soon; they’re worried that the market will begin pricing in the inevitable rise in sea levels, which could lead to a considerable mark down on their home values. [Bloomberg]

5 studios
The James Bond franchise is up for grabs. Sony (which has been distributing the films for more than a decade), Warner Bros., Universal Pictures, 20th Century Fox and Annapurna are competing to score 007 distribution rights. It isn’t a particularly lucrative investment — the distributor will only see a potion of the profits — but bagging James Bond is a heck of a status symbol. [The New York Times]

38 percent
Percentage of American liberals who are religiously unaffiliated, more than double the percentage from the same survey in the 1990s. Needless to say, don’t hold your breath for a progressive version of the religious right. [FiveThirtyEight]

63.4 percent
Percentage of 18-to-35 year-old workers who have been with their current employer for 13 months or more. Millennials are doing less job switching than their predecessors, members of Generation X, were at the same age. [Pew Research Center]

173 trademarks
In the last 10 years, Ivanka Trump’s trademark company — Ivanka Trump Marks LLC — has filed 173 trademarks in foreign countries. The goal seems to be to eventually do business simply as “Ivanka” in the future. [Bloomberg]

$783,000
Amount New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo made in royalties from sales of his book, “All Things Possible: Setbacks and Successes in Politics and Life.” The weird part? He only moved about 3,200 copies of the tome, making that number ridiculously high for a political memoir. [International Business Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news. Happy weed day, weed people.

21 years
After 21 years at Fox News, Bill O’Reilly is out. [Deadline]

21 years
Yahoo has filed its final quarterly report as a publicly traded company — the last one in its 21-year history. Next up, being part of Verizon, which acquired Yahoo in a deal that’s expected to be finalized in June. Well, unless the deal with Verizon somehow falls apart. [The New York Times]

51 points
Last night, the Oklahoma City Thunder’s Russell Westbrook set a NBA playoff record for points in a game while also notching a triple double. He amassed 51 points, 10 rebounds and 13 assists. And the Thunder still lost to the Houston Rockets, going down 0-2 in the series. [ESPN]

54 percent
Percentage of Americans who believe “science and religion are often in conflict.” That view is most popular among the religiously unaffiliated (65 percent) and black Protestants (62 percent). [PRRI]

65 percent
Nationwide name recognition for Press Secretary Sean Spicer. For perspective, as Politico wrote, Spicer is roughly as well-known nationally as Rob Portman is in Ohio, which first elected him to the U.S. Senate in 2010. Spicer has held this gig for roughly 90 days. [POLITICO]

20,000 retired miners
Over 20,000 retired miners will see their government-funded health benefits lapse in late April if President Trump and GOP members of Congress fail to come up with a legislative fix. [The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news. 

12 years old
Tye Trujillo debuted this week as fill-in bassist for the band Korn. Trujillo is the son of Metallica bassist Robert Trujillo and will anchor Korn’s South American tour. He is also 12 years old and presumably having the time of his life. [Vulture]

34 years
U.K. soccer club Brighton will be promoted to the Premier League after 34 years of looking up at the top tier of English soccer. Essentially, the worst teams in the Premier league get replaced by the best teams in the next highest tier, the English League Championship. [ESPN FC]

48 percent
With 48 percent of the vote in Tuesday’s special election in Georgia’s 6th Congressional District, Democrat Jon Ossoff came in shy of the 50 percent threshold needed to stave off a runoff. He will face Republican Karen Handel in Round 2 on June 20. [FiveThirtyEight]

63 percent
Percentage of the more than 2,300 Florida inmates incarcerated for opioid trafficking who had never been to prison before. [Reason]

199,000 applications
H-1B visa applications received in the first five days after the government started accepting them (on April 3). The visa — intended for high-skilled foreign workers — had seen ever-increasing demand until this year, when the number of applications dropped below 200,000 for the first time since 2014. [CNN]

$136 billion
Estimate for Amazon’s total online revenue. Part of which comes from shoes — Amazon is responsible for approximately 26 percent of all online shoe sales. Zappos, which Amazon owns, likely accounts for only a small fraction those sales, raising questions about why Amazon won’t just roll it into its main shoe business. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
CORRECTION (April 19, 1:27 p.m.): A previous version of this article incorrectly described the size of Amazon’s shoe business; $136 billion is the revenue of the whole company, not its shoe business alone.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news. 

1.4 percent
The state of Mississippi is barely approving anyone for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, a federal welfare program for low-income residents. Last year, 11,717 people applied, and just 167 were approved, according to an analysis by the progressive news site ThinkProgress. That measly approval rate, 1.4 percent, is a huge outlier. [ThinkProgress]

21 percentage points
On Tuesday morning, U.K. Prime Minister Theresa May announced that she will seek an early snap election on June 8. The decision might have been motivated by the Conservative Party’s robust support at the moment, with a recent YouGov poll showing them up 21 percentage points over Labour. [The New York Times, Jon Williams]

88 percent
Zendrive, a driving analytics company, found that three million drivers, traveling 5.6 billion miles, were using their phones 88 percent of their journeys. As Wired wrote, “The average driver spends 3.5 minutes on the phone per one hour trip, a stat that sounds worse when you realize just a two-second distraction increases your risk of crashing by 20 percent.” [Wired]

20 million
U.S. income taxes are due today, so be sure to get on that. In 2015, more than 20 million people — about 1-in-7 filers, waited until the final week to send in their tax returns. That’s kind of ridiculous because most people get a refund for all their trouble anyway. [FiveThirtyEight]

98.75 million subscribers
Number of Netflix subscribers at the end of March, as the company added fewer new members than anticipated in the first three months of the year. [Variety]

$823 billion
Amount invested into Vanguard mutual funds over the last three years. That’s a ton of money: Over the same period, the entire rest of the mutual fund industry, more than 4,000 firms, took in a net of $97 billion. [The New York Times]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
