
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

$10.69
A 22-year-old ingeniously stopped an international cybersecurity disaster by spending $10.69, registering a website and triggering a kill switch. [MalwareTech, The Washington Post]

97 percent
Percentage of drug cases where defendants cooperate and plead guilty, a figure that was the same both before and after former U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder told prosecutors not to report the volume of drugs involved in a case if it would require a mandatory minimum sentence. While prosecutors thought this would hurt their ability to get drug defendants to play ball, the stats don’t bear that out. Current Attorney General Jeff Sessions has overturned that policy, and now federal prosecutors are told to prosecute drug offenses to the strictest possible sentence. [NBC News]

1,795 percent
The song “Brandy (You’re a Fine Girl)” plays a rather central role in the hit “Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2” and has struck streaming gold, with a 1,795 percent increase in Spotify streams a week after the film’s U.S. release. [The Hollywood Reporter]

25,000 pounds
A handwritten copy of a brief bit of Harry Potter prequel fiction written by J.K. Rowling herself was stolen in a burglary in Britain. The buyer paid 25,000 pounds for it at a charity auction in 2008. Rowling has urged fans not to buy it if offered. [The Telegraph]

195,245 public data sets
Number of data sets available on Data.gov three months ago. Last week, that figure was down to less than 156,000. [The Washington Post]

$14.7 million
We have the first bomb of the blockbuster season: “King Arthur: Legend of the Sword” pulled just $14.7 million this past weekend. The film cost $175 million to make. [AP News]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

$0.0012
A meme-inspired internet cryptocurrency, Dogecoin — as of early Thursday afternoon, worth just over a tenth of a cent per coin — may be on the verge of collapse after a prominent Reddit bot specializing in Dogecoin tipping was looted by its creator. Man, and I was so close to saving up enough Dogecoin to buy a seasteading cabin with my online libertarian buds. This joke of a currency sponsored a NASCAR car. Two times. In real life. [Gizmodo]

44 percent
A plurality of Americans, 48 percent, support the goals of the science marches and protests held in April (26 percent are opposed). But the public is even more split on whether those demonstrations will make any difference: 44 percent believe they’ll help public support for science, and 44 percent believe they won’t. Seven percent of the country agrees with me and thinks the demonstrations will hurt science. [Pew Research Center]

46 minutes and 38 seconds
How long Afrobeat musician Femi Kuti held a single note, breaking the record held by saxophone god Kenny G (45 minutes, 47 seconds). The issue? Apparently Kenny G’s record had already been broken 17 years ago by fellow saxophonist Vann Burchfield, who held a note for 47 minutes and 6 seconds. Kuti is retrying the attempt this Sunday, but why did no one know about Burchfield’s achievement? As he told NPR, “I knew that I had broke the record. I contacted a few local radio stations here in Birmingham, Alabama. But just out of respect, I guess, for him [G], I just let the record stand as it was.” [NPR]

300 percent
One side effect of having a devastating opiate crisis is also having a horrifying Hepatitis C outbreak. A new report from the CDC says Hepatitis C cases increased nearly 300 percent from 2010 through 2015. [NPR]

£453 million
A court in the U.K. awarded the estranged wife of an oil and gas trader £453 million (about $582 million) in one of the nation’s largest divorces settlements ever. (The court did not identify the couple.) Looks like London is now the anti-Vegas, the place you go as a tourist to get split. [The Guardian]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 percent
Here’s some financially irksome news: Fraud rates are steadily rising in auto loan applications. Why should that worry you? During the housing crisis in 2009, fraud rates in the mortgage lending market exceeded the 1 percent threshold, and auto loans are getting ever closer to that level, with total fraud expected to double from about $2-3 billion in 2015 to $4-6 billion in 2017. [Bloomberg]

3 laptop fires
Number of incidents involving a laptop-caused fire on flights in the U.S. in 2016, according to a FAA document reviewed by The Daily Beast. There were 33 such incidents involving personal electronic devices generally. Still, the Department of Homeland Security is considering banning laptops in carry-on bags on flights to the U.S. from Europe, presumably so they can be stowed away in the baggage area far away from fire extinguishers. [The Daily Beast]

25 percent
Percentage of Americans who strongly approve of President Trump’s job performance, according to a new Quinnipiac University poll. Fifty-one percent strongly disapprove. Counting people who don’t feel so strongly, Trump’s approval rating is 41 percent, per FiveThirtyEight’s tracker. [The Washington Post, FiveThirtyEight]

72 percent
Percent of citizens surveyed in the Czech Republic who identify as religiously unaffiliated, making the country one of the most secular in Europe. [Pew Research Center]

282 alcoholic appearances
Product placement of alcohol brands is on the rise, roughly doubling from “140 appearances in the top 100 films in 1996 to 282 appearances in the top 100 films of 2015,” according to new research. The study found that 44 percent of the 2,000 films they looked at featured a specific, existing brand of alcohol. [Smithsonian Magazine]

$1.3 billion
The Peanuts gang made the brand investment consortiums that own and exploit their intellectual property $1.3 billion in retail sales in 2015. That money will be going to someone else in the future, though. Iconix Brand Group is selling their entertainment division, which has a majority stake in Snoopy and the gang, to DHX Media for $345 million. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1 week
U.S. army private Chelsea Manning has confirmed through a tweet that she will be released from prison next week. Then-President Barack Obama commuted Manning’s sentence in January. [BBC]

3.7 years
President Trump “terminated” FBI Director James Comey on Tuesday. The official reasoning for the sacking had to do with Comey’s handling of the investigation into former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s email usage. But many members of Congress suspect the firing had more to do with the FBI’s investigation into Russia’s alleged interference in the 2016 presidential campaign and potential ties to Trump associates. Comey served as director for 3.7 years, the shortest tenure since J. Edgar Hoover did it for 48 years. [FiveThirtyEight]

6 months
Recreational marijuana goes on sale in Nevada on July 1, six months ahead of the scheduled deadline. [KTVN]

3.4 million retweets
There is a new “most popular tweet.” Carter Wilkerson, a teenager in Nevada, asked Wendy’s how many retweets he needed to get free chicken nuggets for a year. Wendy’s said 18 million. And so far, 3.4 million Twitter users have obliged. That’s well short of the bar, but Wendy’s caved and gave Wilkerson his nugs. This means some kid now has the most-ever retweets thanks to an advertisement. Hell is empty and all the devils are… back and crispier than ever! If this gets one favorable email response I will get a year’s supply of Ocean Meat from Arby’s! [The Verge]

$90 million
Self-claimed valuation of Fyre Media — the company behind Fyre Festival, the would-be music festival in the Bahamas that left concertgoers stranded — according to one of the several lawsuits that have cropped up around the absurd incident. [Bloomberg]

$1.5 billion
John H. Thompson has resigned as the director of the U.S. Census Bureau. His departure comes as the 2020 decennial census approaches and worries about funding for the survey abound. Funding ramps up for the census as each decade comes to a close, but that funding is increasing more slowly this time. [The Washington Post, FiveThirtyEight]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 
Note: A year’s supply of Arby’s for me is precisely zero Arby’s, so don’t bother with the email.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

1993
An American service member was killed in Somalia last week while serving in an “advise and assist” role for the Somali National Army while it fights al-Shabab militants. Two other U.S. service members were hurt. This is the first confirmed U.S. combat death in Somalia since 18 Americans were killed there in 1993 in the “Black Hawk Down” incident. [BBC]

€25,000
An investigation into alleged blasphemy by comedian Stephen Fry was dropped after Irish police could not find enough people outraged over his remarks. (Fry had referred to a “capricious, mean-minded, stupid god.”) Under Ireland’s 2009 Defamation Act, being “grossly abusive or insulting in relation to matters sacred to any religion, thereby intentionally causing outrage among a substantial number of adherents of that religion,” can get you fined up to €25,000 (about $27,000). [The Independent]

$150,000
The famous 1925 Scopes trial, in which attorney Clarence Darrow defended the teaching of evolution against opposing council William Jennings Bryan, took place at the Rhea County courthouse in Dayton, Tennessee. And while there’s been a statue of Bryan outside the courthouse for years, there are now plans for a seven-foot tall, $150,000 bronze statue of Darrow, who represented science teacher John T. Scopes. But not everyone is happy with Darrow’s return. [The Wall Street Journal]

$250,000
The number of colleges and universities in the U.S. that cost more than $250,000 has surpassed 40, according to updated U.S. News and World Report data. [Quartz]

$145 million
“Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2” won the box office this past weekend, pulling in an estimated $145 million domestically. [Yahoo]

$2.4 billion
Coach will buy Kate Spade for $2.4 billion, a devastating blow to me personally. The deal will reportedly close later this year, at which point I will go from knowing two handbag brands my sister likes to just one. I was doing so well. [Reuters]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

5 scientists
At least five scientists have been dismissed from the Environmental Protection Agency’s Board of Scientific Counselors. A spokesperson for EPA administrator Scott Pruitt suggested Pruitt may swap in people from the industries the EPA regulates. [The New York Times]

5.7 percent
Mexico overtook Germany to become the fourth-largest beer producer in 2016, upping production to 5.7 percent of the world’s market. (Well, at least according to data from the Mexican Beer Chamber.) China, making about 24 percent of the world’s beer, is No. 1, followed by the U.S. and then Brazil. All together, the top five countries make about 55 percent of Earth’s beer. [Bloomberg]

10 percent
During President Trump’s first 50 days in office, 62 percent of his tweets got more than 100,000 likes. In the following 51 days, just 10 percent of his tweets passed that benchmark. [Bloomberg]

66 percent
France elected centrist candidate Emmanuel Macron as its president on Sunday. Macron soundly defeated far-right National Front candidate Marine Le Pen, 66 percent to 34 percent. [The Guardian]

$25 million
It appears that Comcast dodged a bullet last week. Apparently, the company’s venture capital arm almost gave up to $25 million to the “organizers” of the doomed Fyre Festival. That was the would-be uber-exclusive music festival that turned instead into a dirtier, less funny version Gilligan’s Island. [Bloomberg Pursuits]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

2 busted students
In an elaborate scheme involving air ducts, two students attempted to steal a final exam from an instructor’s office at 2 a.m. at the University of Kentucky. They were busted when the professor returned from a late night meal. [The New York Times]

77 percent
Canadian authorities are recalling Bombay Sapphire gin bottles due to a batch that was 77 percent alcohol rather than 40 percent. I prefer to call those happy little accidents. [The Guardian]

217-213
The U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that would remove several protections for people with pre-existing conditions, cut Medicaid, allow states to get waivers that allow them to drop essential health benefits, cut taxes on the rich, phase out funding for Medicaid expansion and more. It now moves on to the Senate. [Shots, The New York Times]

$783 million
The Trump administration is refusing to release $783 million in payroll data related to over 10,000 government employees operating outside the U.S. [Asbury Park Press]

1.4 billion pounds
How much used vegetable oil was turned into biodiesel last year in U.S. refineries. It’s a pretty lucrative market, which now means that people are stealing gross, used vegetable oil out of the back of local restaurants. [Bloomberg]

$765 billion
The GOP House’s health care bill is estimated to cut taxes by approximately $765 billion. The top 20 percent of earners will get around 64 percent of those savings as health care for the poor is slashed. [NPR]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

22 appearances
Official public appearances by President Donald Trump that have not been at the White House, Air Force One, an agency of government or Mar-a-Lago. Other recent presidents were far more willing to leave the bubble, with Obama making 62 appearances in his first 100 days as President, Bush making 80 and Clinton making 46. [Reuters]

60 people
The election in France is heating up, and 60 sports personalities have now signed a letter backing centrist Emmanuel Macron over the extreme right’s Marine Le Pen. [Bloomberg]

61 percent
Percentage of Americans who oppose laws that allow business owners to refuse to serve gay and lesbian people on account of their religious beliefs. Only about 30 percent of the country supports those laws, but half of white evangelical protestants back them. [PRRI]

64 percent
Percentage of New York City drivers who admitted they drove 10+ miles per hour above the speed limit. Manhattan has the fewest speeders and Staten Island had the most, thus justifying your decision to never go to Staten Island. [Gothamist]

80
About 7,000 FARC members are in demobilization camps around Colombia, and there’s already one sign that the peace process could be good: there’s a baby boom among the former rebels! About 80 women in the demobilization camps are pregnant, and about 60 babies have already been born since the agreement to end the war. [WBUR]

85 percent
Casinos in the Philippines are making bank with high rollers phoning in their bets. As much as 85 percent of the money in VIP rooms may come from people betting by proxy. That’s a huge chunk of change: $27 billion was bet this way last year. The issue? This is an awesome way to launder money and U.S. officials are considering it a risk. [Bloomberg]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

21 percent
Auto thefts in Mexico rose 21 percent in March compared to a year earlier, but auto recovery rates have decreased. If you sell car insurance in Mexico, this is a devastating dynamic. [Bloomberg]

25 counties
50 percent of the U.S. coal mining jobs are in a mere 25 counties, a Quartz study found. [Quartz]

29 inches
American Airlines is adding more seats to some of its planes, and it’s doing it by reducing legroom. Three rows will lose two inches — from 31 to 29 inches — and the rest of the economy cabin will have 30 inches of legroom. This pushes American closer to budget airlines like Spirit, which provide only 28 inches of legroom. [CNN]

90 minutes
An Australian man was imprisoned by U.S. immigration officials after getting delayed at the Canada-U.S. border and subsequently overstaying his U.S. visa by 90 minutes. [The Canberra Times]

332
Manhattan is getting a new area code in addition to the famed 212 code, the “which outer borough are you from?” 917 code, and the “so you’re new here” 646 area code. [DNA Info]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the numbers tucked inside the news.

2 percent
The average price of a new car in the U.S. increased roughly 2 percent over the past year, while sales of new cars dropped about 1.5 percent. [Bloomberg]

4.9 to 1
The Black List, a screenwriting trade site, found that the biggest gender skew in its script database was for horror movies; for every one horror script written by a female scribe there were 4.9 written by men. That gender imbalance was lowest in the family film, drama and coming-of-age genres. [The Black List]

10 landings
SpaceX launched a spy satellite for the U.S. government yesterday as its first mission for the military. The company managed to once again land the Falcon 9 rocket after the launch, making this its fourth successful terrestrial landing and the 10th overall successful rocket recovery. [The Verge]

$27.89
Cost of a 22 pound box of Haas avocados from the Mexican state of Michoacan as of last Thursday. That’s the highest it has been in 19 years. Mexico supplies 82 percent of U.S. avocados, and demand multiplied to 1.76 billion pounds in 2015 from 24 million pounds in 2000. [Bloomberg]

32 million
Number of students who received federally subsidized school lunches. The Trump administration has done away with Obama administration regulations that reduced the fat, sodium and calories and increased availability of vegetables, fruits and whole grains in cafeteria food. [The New York Times]

$61 million
As part of the bipartisan funding bill that will keep the government open through September, Congress included a $61 million fund to reimburse local police departments for President Trump’s security and the security of his family. Most of that is getting sent to New York City, where Melania and Barron Trump reside. Finally New Yorkers can return to directing 100 percent of their white-hot fiscal rage at the MTA. [CNN]

If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.
