
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 degree Celsius
For the first time, global temperatures this year will be more than 1 degree Celsius higher than pre-Industrial Revolution levels. This is partly because of the El Niño effect, but it is nonetheless a sign of things to come, according to Britain’s Met Office, the national weather service of the U.K. [Reuters]

2 ice volcanoes
NASA announced evidence of two ice volcanoes near Pluto’s south pole, which really makes Earth look like it’s not even trying. Sure, we’ve got normal volcanoes, but volcanoes belching ice, ammonia and methane? That’s some Hoth-level geology, Pluto, and makes us look like chumps here on our own terra firma. [The Verge]

104 games
The Xbox One will support 104 games that were previously available on the Xbox 360, finally implementing promised backward capability for Microsoft’s newer console. [The Verge]

$26,000
A man was arrested Sunday after police say he tried to set fire to an 80-by-50-foot flag that flies near the Tampa Bay Buccaneers’ stadium after the team lost to the New York Giants. The flag cost $26,000, some of which apparently went toward making the banner flame-resistant. That guy is, without doubt, the worst pirate I’ve ever seen. [ESPN]

48,000 positions
The trucking industry is hurting: The industry is about 800,000 strong, and it has 48,000 open positions. Only recently has truck drivers’ average pay begun to rise, which may help companies fill those spots, but in a business with massive turnover — between 90 and 100 percent — the lack of drivers is still a major concern. [The Huffington Post]

$718,000
M.C. Dean, a communications contractor, may face a $718,000 proposed fine from the Federal Communications Commission after the agency caught it blocking WiFi hotspots in the Baltimore Convention Center. [The Consumerist]

1 million euros
French police last week arrested Lamine Diack, the former president of the International Association of Athletics Federations, who is accused of accepting more than 1 million euros in bribes from Russian athletics to cover up widespread doping by the nation’s competitors. The allegations are laid out in a new report from the former head of the World Anti-Doping Agency, detailing cheating from the Russian athletics federation. [The Guardian]

$25 million
The University of Virginia fraternity named in a retracted Rolling Stone story about a rape is suing the magazine, seeking $25 million. [Gawker]

100 million
Estimated number of people who could be driven into extreme poverty by 2030 because of the deleterious effects of global climate change, according to the World Bank. If you’re wondering why it seems like everyone is all of a sudden trying to drop the most fire climate change paper of 2015, the United Nations is hosting a climate summit in Paris this month. [The Associated Press]

$170.4 million
A Modigliani painting sold for $170.4 million at a Christie’s auction Monday, the second-highest price ever for auctioned art. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
3 seconds
Geoff Britten became the first American Ninja Warrior in the six-year existence of the NBC show of the same name, completing the required feats of strength with just 0.35 seconds to spare, putting him in line for the $1 million prize. Problem was, just minutes later Isaac Caldiero became the second American Ninja Warrior, besting Britten by three seconds and winning away the $1 million for himself. [Vice Sports]

11 points
To call Chelsea’s Premier League campaign thus far, and defense of its league title, rocky would be to do great insult to rocks. The team has garnered just 11 points through its first 12 games, worse than any other defending champ besides Ipswich Town in 1961. Chelsea’s seven losses are unprecedented for a defending champion this early in the season. [FiveThirtyEight]

15 vehicles
The ground opened up in an IHOP parking lot in Meridian, Mississippi, swallowing about 15 vehicles. No one appeared to be hurt in the cave-in, which was about 50 feet wide and 600 feet long. [USA Today]

25 years
Myanmar held its first democratic elections in 25 years. Votes are still being counted in an election that saw more than 6,000 candidates from over 90 parties running for the country’s 664-seat parliament. Voter turnout may be as high as 80 percent. [BBC]

47 percent higher
The Trump Bump lives. “Saturday Night Live” viewership ratings for the episode hosted by Donald Trump over the weekend were the show’s highest since 2012 — and were 47 percent higher than the ratings during Hillary Clinton’s guest appearance earlier this season. Why? I have no idea. [Entertainment Weekly]

About $115 a day
About $115 a day will get you a bed and three meals on an ocean freighter. As the global economy has slowed, and the shipping business along with it, marine freight companies have been offering no-frills cruises on their massive vessels. That’s more expensive than a ride on a typical Carnival cruise — and without the discotheque — but it’s well worth it to largely avoid the, like, other people. [Bloomberg Businessweek]

300 gigabytes
In what is nothing less than a crime against humanity, Comcast is testing bandwidth caps on home Internet use. Under the scheme, customers have a monthly limit of 300 gigabytes and pay an overage fee of $10 for every additional 50 gigabytes they use. The company has rolled this out in three cities, with plans to expand. Call your congressman. [Engadget]

$1,639.47
Marco Rubio had a Florida GOP credit card for four years in his role as head of campaign operations for Florida House Republicans. During that time, he was hit with seven delinquency charges that totaled $1,639.47. [New York Times]

$2.4 million
John Lennon’s guitar sold for $2.4 million at auction, significantly beating estimates. The 1962 J-160E Gibson Acoustic, originally purchased for 161 pounds, was used to record “I Want to Hold Your Hand” and “She Loves You.” [Time]

60 million people
Nearly 60 million people are displaced by war and persecution. The New York Times introduced its readers to a few of them over the weekend, via virtual reality. The newspaper included Google Cardboard viewers with its Sunday deliveries; they can be used with an immersive video feature on a custom smartphone app. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
0 shows
So far into this season of television, none of the four major networks have cancelled a television show. In recent years, the ratings for several poorly performing new programs would have been enough to get an ax, but they’re all still kicking. Networks haven’t gone this long without a cancellation since the 1950s, according to the people who pay close attention to these things. [Los Angeles Times]

4 percent
Average amount of time Sean Connery was shirtless onscreen during his stint as James Bond, the highest amount of time of any Bond. [Bloomberg]

9-12 people
A water main replacement at NYU uncovered a 200-year-old burial chamber with the remains of nine to 12 people loosely entombed inside. There was also a stack of a dozen coffins. [The Associated Press]

14.6 percent drop
Men’s Wearhouse, which owns the Jos. A. Bank brand, announced Thursday that sales were cratering at Jos. A. Bank following the phasing out of several popular sales. Third quarter sales were down 14.6 percent, which was way off from what the company was expecting. Traders in nice suits quickly sold the stock; it was down 36 percent before the opening bell Friday. [Business Insider]

30 percent
College students are 30 percent more likely to use Adderall for non-medical purposes — as in, recreationally or off-prescription — than their non-matriculated peers. [FiveThirtyEight]

61-0
The Maldives parliament voted to impeach the small island nation’s vice president after his arrest regarding an alleged plot to kill the president in his speedboat with an explosion last month. The vice president denies he was involved. [ABC News]

100 people
A pumpkin carving event at an Oregon Catholic school may be the source for a norovirus outbreak coursing through the community there. More than 100 people have been infected. [Reuters]

2,000 high schools
Adidas announced it would offer financial support to any of the 2,000 American high schools with racial epithets as their name or mascot — you know, just like the Washington football team — if they wanted to change their name. This enraged the D.C. metropolitan american football squad, which released a statement claiming that Adidas was acting hypocritically. “Adidas make hundreds of millions of dollars selling uniforms to teams like the Chicago Blackhawks and the Golden State Warriors, while profiting off sales of fan apparel for the Cleveland Indians, Florida State Seminoles, Atlanta Braves and many other like-named teams,” the team spokesman said. [The Washington Post]

6,000 passengers
That’s the number of airline passengers left stranded in an area of Indonesia after the eruption of a volcano that sent ash and detritus everywhere. So far, there are no reports of injuries. [Wired]

$1 billion
Toyota announced an investment of $1 billion over five years on an artificial intelligence team of 200 in Silicon Valley. Self-driving cars remain inevitable. [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
6 penguins
When you hear “Australia” and “animal” in the same sentence, you’re probably dealing with something dangerous, venomous, weird, horrifying, or some combination of the four. It’s the evolutionary Thunderdome down there. However, there’s a rare heartwarming story coming out of Australia’s animal kingdom: the resurgence of what’s called the little penguin. On Middle Island, the population had crashed from 800 little penguins to six thanks to invasive foxes decimating the colony. After locals introduced highly territorial sheepdogs to protect the colony, the population is back in the triple digits. The strategy will be applied elsewhere following the success. [The New York Times]

16 percent
According to a FiveThirtyEight model, the probability that Ohio State University wins the national title in college football this year, the highest chance of any team. They’re closely tailed by Clemson, Alabama and TCU. [FiveThirtyEight]

20 percent
Percentage of fathers who say that parenting made their career advancement harder, compared to 41 percent of mothers. [Pew Research Center]

41 cents
Cost per year per American citizen for NASA’s entire Curiosity program, which put a robot on Mars. While NASA projects have a generally large budget (tossing stuff into space isn’t easy), from an annualized and normalized point of view it’s actually rather cheap. [Popular Science]

54.4 percent
Percentage of black millennials who reported that they or someone they knew had been harassed or the subject of violence from police, according to a new University of Chicago report. Compare that to a third of whites and a quarter of Latinos. [PBS]

$5,000
A Hispanic advocacy group will give $5,000 to anyone who successfully calls Donald Trump a racist on Saturday Night Live when it’s on the air. This may get weird. [The Hill]

800,000
While crowd estimation can be inexact, reports claim 800,000 fans of the Kansas City Royals showed up to a victory celebration for the World Series winners. Kansas City proper has a population of 467,000. [The Kansas City Star]

$879,000
How much the Atlanta Falcons were paid by the Department of Defense for salutes to U.S. armed forces over the past 4 years, the highest figure in a league that received an aggregate $8 million for the sponsored content. [Deadspin]

$3.9 billion
Travel booking site Expedia will buy HomeAway, a vacation rental site that was eclipsed by AirBnB, for $3.9 billion. [The New York Times]

8 billion views
Daily views of Facebook videos, according to the company. Keep in mind that Facebook counts three seconds of viewing as a “view,” so that may sound higher than it is, however it’s double the number of views Facebook videos were getting in April. [Reuters]

Check this out: FiveThirtyEight is doing some research into James Bond and we would love your help! If you’ve got some time, help us figure out the best Bond gadget, the best Bond villain, the best Bond villain henchman, the best MI-6 employee, the sexiest Bond, and Bond’s best act of spy craft.

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4 years
It’s only been a few months, but civilization has withered without Jon Stewart on television. But on Tuesday, HBO announced a four-year deal with the former host of “The Daily Show,” focusing at first on short-form content for the digital platforms, like HBO Go, you’re using your roommate’s girlfriend’s parent’s credentials to access. [Medium]

6.5 percent growth
Welcome to China, where GDP growth doesn’t matter and the points are made up. President Xi Jinping set a new GDP growth floor, “suggesting Beijing could tolerate growth as low as 6.5 percent.” But China’s economic figures are the subject of substantial skepticism from well-regarded analysts like the International Monetary Fund. [The Wall Street Journal]

20 times
Are you looking to hire someone to fill a tech job? Do you have a drug-free workplace? It’s probably best not to bring that latter point up: An advertisement for a technology position is 20 times likelier to perform among the worst quartile of ads if you mention that drugs are not welcome in your shop, according to a study of job postings by Texito, a language analysis startup. Having seen the documentary “Silicon Valley,” I can understand this reticence among programmers. [Bloomberg]

31 percent
Alcoa, the aluminum producer, will eliminate 503,000 metric tons of domestic smelting capacity due to the metal’s falling price. That amounts to 31 percent of the U.S.’s aluminum smelting capacity, a business that is rapidly moving overseas in search of cheaper labor and higher production rates. [Bloomberg]

41 percent genuine
A new report to Chinese lawmakers claims that less than 59 percent of products sold online in the nation in the past year were genuine. China has for years been seeking to overcome a reputation for counterfeit goods, but a booming e-commerce market means that nobody really wants to enforce the laws defining what’s real. [The Guardian]

50 percent
Percentage of younger millennials — those born between 1990 and 1996, like me — who believe in a god with absolute certainty, the lowest level of any age bracket according to a Pew Research Center survey. In the same age bracket, only 38 percent said religion was very important in their lives. [Pew Research Center]

59 percent
Percentage of adult Americans who took a prescription drug in 2012, up from 51 percent in 2000. [The Washington Post]

75 terabytes
Microsoft thought it was a great idea to offer “unlimited” cloud storage, until the obvious happened and several subscribers to its OneDrive service uploaded more than 75 terabytes of data each. This led Microsoft to realize its essential error: trusting consumers. Now, there’s a 1 terabyte cap on Microsoft’s unlimited cloud storage. For those keeping score at home, a terabyte is about 1,000 gigabytes, and while the concept of infinity has always confused me, I don’t think that qualifies as “unlimited.” [Slate]

$671,061
Earnings of the average person in the top 1 percent of wage earners in 2014. In a terrifying tale of heartbreak and woe, the incomes of the top 1 percent may be stagnating. Unfortunately, the player of the world’s smallest violin has seen brisk work lately and is thus in this income bracket and unavailable for a performance. But, I assure you the player of the world’s smallest didgeridoo — a man of more modest means — was emphatically pouring it out for these poor souls. [FiveThirtyEight]

€2 billion
Or roughly $2.19 billion, the estimated cost of the economic risks inherent in the Volkswagen recall and diesel emissions scandal. That’s according to VW. [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
7.7 to 10.8 percent
A preliminary study about the impact that Spotify has had on the music business contains an interesting nugget: in a given country, the top 50 tracks accounted for between 7.7 and 10.8 percent of all streams in a given week. [FiveThirtyEight]

9 states
In nine states, the average per-gallon price of regular unleaded gasoline is lower than $2. South Carolina has the cheapest gas of all. [The Post and Courier]

30 percent growth
We may be approaching Peak Avocado. The approximate increase in demand for avocados in the past year was 30 percent, according to food supplier Reynolds. That the fruit has been introduced to Chinese markets to wide acclaim is also going to fuel avocado demand. As someone who considers avocados the mayonnaise of vegetables — I think it’s on too much stuff, too neutral tasting, I never know when it’s gone bad and it’s really only good when a bunch of spices are mixed in — I’m indifferent to this. [The Guardian]

67 degrees
The GOP field has compiled an odd list of demands for future networks hosting primary debates, including forbidding moderators from asking candidates to raise their hands or from directors to include audience reaction shots. Perhaps the weirdest is that they “pledge that the temperature in the hall be kept below 67 degrees,” presumably to mitigate profuse sweating. This is very easy to work around, because they forgot to provide a unit. Networks can and should set the thermostat below 67 degrees Celsius out of spite, and as a way to ensure our next potential president has both attention to detail and the ability to negotiate with Vladimir Putin in his sauna. [The Washington Post]

80 days
Everything is darkness: Monday was the first of many days where I saw the sun set before 5 p.m. In New York, the next day to have a sunset after 5 p.m. will be January 22, which is 80 days from today. [New York 1]

2,250 feet long
A 150-foot wide crack that runs for about 2,250 feet has opened up in the foothills of Wyoming, believed to be the result of a landslide. The pictures are horrifying and and also fantastic but still not a reliable reason to go to Wyoming. [Atlas Obscura]

11,000 applications
The Liberal party dominated last week’s Canadian elections, and that means the new government is looking for people to fill roughly 1,000 open positions. The Liberal party reported receiving upwards of 11,000 applications for jobs in the new government since Friday. [CBC]

12339
China has set up an emergency phone line to report spies. People can now dial 110 for police, 119 for a fire, and 12339 if they want to report espionage. This is a contrast to the United States, where if you speak loudly and clearly into any cellphone you can probably be pretty sure the right people are hearing the news. [The New York Times]

$5.9 billion
In a massive acquisition, games developer Activision bought King Digital, the company behind Candy Crush and Farm Hero and their assorted successor brands, for $5.9 billion. Consider for a hot second that a company just paid more money for a producer of mobile games fueled by in-app purchases than Disney (where I work) paid for Star Wars. [VentureBeat]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 hours, 10 minutes, 34 seconds
Kenyan Stanley Biwott won the New York City Marathon Sunday, and Mary Keitany, also of Kenya, won a repeat women’s title with a time of 2:24:25. Sunday was a great day to walk home in New York — it was fun to guess if the sweaty, dehydrated person in colorful tights was a marathoner or a hungover Halloween reveler trying to get home from the night before. [The Associated Press]

4 leagues
Sunday was the U.S. sport’s equinox, when each major American men’s sports league had an event going on. There was a World Series game, 12 NFL games, 7 NBA games and 5 NHL games on the calendar. It was the 15th such event in history. [FiveThirtyEight]

7-2
The Kansas City Royals won the World Series Sunday night in a 12th inning massacre, winning 7-2 over the New York Mets at Citi Field in Queens. [ESPN]

14 touchdowns
Of the rest of the events on the sport’s equinox, the strangest was the game between the New York Giants at New Orleans Saints, which ended in a 52-49 New Orleans win. The game led to a whole bunch of records: Drew Brees became the eighth quarterback to throw seven touchdowns in a game, and the 13 touchdowns Eli Manning and Brees threw combined was an NFL record as well. Manning was the first person to throw six touchdowns and no interceptions in a game and still lose it. Giants fan and Game of Thrones scribe George R.R. Martin would go on to comment, “All in all, a horrid day. Life is miserable and full of pain,” so I’m pretty sure he wrote your favorite character’s death last night. [ESPN]

25 years old
IMDb, one of the oldest internet-native brands still kicking, celebrated its 25th year since its founding in a USENET group in October of 1990. Keep in mind that the World Wide Web wasn’t launched until 1991, and that I am only a month older than IMDb. [VentureBeat]

About 1,000 police officers
Number of police officers in 41 states who were stripped of their badges relating to an incident of sexual misconduct, sex crimes, or rape in a six-year period, according to an Associated Press investigation. [The Associated Press]

$61,000 fine
Beverly Hills, California was fined $61,000 for not forcing residents to reduce water consumption during the state’s stifling drought. It’s the only non-desert municipality to face a fine. Not exactly a great look. [Reuters]

$700,000
Thrift Land USA of Yonkers, New York, will pay the state $700,000 after it was found to have made $10 million off of clothes it claimed would go to charity. [WMTW]

9.3 million square feet
New real estate space for churches and places of worship in the year 2015, down from a dizzying high of 51.9 million new square feet of space added in 2002. This year will have the lowest level of new space added for houses of worship since it began to be tracked in 1967. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 children
China announced the end of its one-child policy, which since 1980 had limited the number of children a couple could have as a population control measure. As a result, China has substantial gender imbalances, even though 65 percent of families were exempted from the policy before the announcement. [FiveThirtyEight]

5 out of 6
It’s not looking great for the New York Mets: Down two games in the World Series, they are at home against Kansas City tonight. Historically, five out of six teams down two games to none in a best-of-seven series go on to lose. [FiveThirtyEight]

85 percent
The percentage of alcohol-dependent adults who are also dependent on nicotine — or, as I like to call it, synergistic vice. Why smoking is appealing to drinkers is somewhat unknown, but an experiment on hard-partying rats found that it might have to do with the anti-sleep effects of nicotine. [Futurity]

86 percent
Since rugby rankings were introduced in 2003, New Zealand’s team has been the top-ranked squad 86 percent of the time. New Zealand will face Australia in an ANZAC grudge match in the worldwide Rugby World Cup final Saturday at the delightfully named Twickenham, in England. [Rugby World Cup]

$99.99
A mass-produced foam surfboard is taking the surfing community by storm, rivaling boards that traditionally sell for about $300. The board, called Wavestorm and available through Costco, has sold about a half-million units since its introduction in 2007. Wavestorm’s growth is odd in an industry that has traditionally used boards designed or hawked by prominent surfers and in a market that has seen slow annual growth and bankruptcies, such as Quiksilver, in recent years. [Bloomberg]

112 pages
A 112-page internal document was leaked from Jeb Bush’s presidential campaign. It includes an advertising plan and internal polling — and blasts Marco Rubio, who is also seeking the Republican nomination. [U.S. News & World Report]

236 votes
U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan of Wisconsin was elected speaker of the House, winning 236 votes from his caucus. Good luck — you’ll need it. [The Guardian]

285 votes
The European Parliament voted 285 to 281 in support of a resolution stating that Edward Snowden should be able to seek asylum in the European Union, a move to protect the leaker from extradition to the United States. [Wired]

3.7 billion
The number of people younger than 50 who have the herpes simplex virus type 1, the kind that gives you cold sores around the mouth for the most part, unless you really screw up and get it on your genitals. [Reuters]

$4.4 billion
China’s steel business is seeing big drops in demand, with medium- to large-sized firms seeing losses of $4.4 billion in the first nine months of the year. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
57.3 percent
The percentage of Kansas City homes that tuned in to the first game of the World Series on Tuesday night, compared with 27 percent of New York City homes. The Royals won that game, and Wednesday night’s too. The Mets return home for the third game, so maybe they’ll turn it around. [CNN Money]

80 percent
The percentage of the 100 most conservative Republican members of Congress who have not yet made an endorsement in the GOP presidential primary. For the 100 most moderate Republican members, that figure is 66 percent. [FiveThirtyEight]

$136
A man who strapped a horrifying Halloween children’s doll into the passenger seat of his car to gain access to a high-occupancy vehicle lane in Tacoma, Washington, was slammed with a $136 ticket by a state trooper. I commend this man as our modern society has stripped away the true meaning of Halloween, which is mischief to satiate whatever trickster god may look favorably upon it. [Associated Press]

150 miles
A specialized military communications blimp became untethered from a mooring in Maryland and blew unguided 150 miles into Pennsylvania. The erstwhile dirigible deflated for an unknown reason, which is nice, because if my history is right, an uncontrolled military communications computer system is basically how Skynet happened and I made plans for the weekend so I don’t need that in my life. [Associated Press]

1,500
Japan has an aging population, the result of decades of declining birth rates and the inexorable forward motion of time. As a result, the nation has a bunch of empty school buildings and has to find something to do with them. Between 2002 and 2013, Japan closed 5,800 school buildings, about 1,500 of which were still in need of a purpose as of 2014. Others have been demolished or turned into rec centers for seniors, private businesses and in one case a hot springs spa. [Quartz]

$5,787
William Gay, a cornerback for the Pittsburgh Steelers, was fined $5,787 by the NFL for wearing purple shoes to commemorate Domestic Violence Awareness Month. Gay’s mother was killed by his stepfather, so the issue is personal for Gay. [NBC Sports]

1.5 million
The worldwide death toll from tuberculosis last year. The disease now kills more people than HIV/AIDS. [Wall Street Journal]

12.95 million
The number of viewers of the premiere episode of the new CBS show “Supergirl,” which tells the story of Clark Kent’s Kryptonian cousin. The show tied for the biggest premiere for a new show in the young adult demographic this year. [Variety]

$82.6 million
How much “Jurassic World” has made in the home-release portion of its run, by far the biggest seller of the year. [Variety]

$2.6 billion
Halloween is huge for the candy business, with the industry expecting $2.6 billion in sales. [Politico]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1:25
Odds that a random spectator would score on a half-court shot after warming up a bit, according to a company that specializes in underwriting those types of promotions — the ones with the disproportionately large checks — seen at basketball games, golf outings and NCAA bracket tournaments. Rather than actually putting up the money up front, organizers pay for insurance from companies like SCA Promotions to hedge their bets against paying out. [Bloomberg]

4 of 10
Chris Ingraham at The Washington Post tracked down 10 reported incidents of a dog accidentally shooting a person since 2004, the latest of which occurred in Indiana last weekend. Not really shocking anyone, four of the 10 took place in Florida, where weird news brews in the primordial soup of synthetic marijuana and weapons. [Washington Post]

7 percent
The percentage of U.S. kids ages 17 and below who have had a parent in jail at some point in their lives. [PBS]

8 percent
As part of a U.S. budget deal reached this week in Washington, the federal government will sell more than 8 percent of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve starting in 2018. The U.S. is currently sitting on 695 million barrels of reserves. [Bloomberg]

31 percent
Apple announced a huge quarter Tuesday: The tech firm’s profits rose 31 percent compared with the same period last year, largely bolstered by sales in China. [Wall Street Journal]

99.88 percent
Jason Pierre-Paul, the star defensive end for the New York Giants who suffered an injury from fireworks this summer that resulted in the loss of his right index finger and part of his thumb, signed a deal with the franchise and may get back on the field as early as Week 10. I did some calculations, and it’s nice to have 99.88 percent of Pierre-Paul back, especially because the Giants have a mere nine sacks this year. [Bleacher Report]

184 goals
Abby Wambach, who led the United States to victory at this year’s Women’s World Cup, announced her retirement from the sport. She’s definitely the greatest of all time, going out with 184 goals in international play, more than any soccer player in history, man or woman. [FiveThirtyEight]

$4,388,600,000
The amount of money raised by venture capital firms in the third quarter of 2015, according to an industry trade group and Thomson Reuters. That is down 59 percent from the second quarter and down 33 percent from the same quarter last year. Maybe the smart money is walking out of the room, maybe not, but that is a precipitous slip. [National Venture Capital Association]

$79 billion
Northrop Grumman won a contract estimated to be worth $79 billion to produce up to 100 stealth bombers for the Air Force, a massive deal even by defense industry standards and one that will basically set the course for how good America might be at bombing stuff with subtlety for the next half-century. [Daily Beast]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
