
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 percent
In New York, any apartment sale of $1 million or more incurs a 1 percent mansion tax, meaning that a $1,000,000 home costs an extra $10,000 compared to a $999,999 home. This means that people trying to sell their apartments in that price range typically aim slightly lower than $1 million. Think of it as the same reason 99 cent stores caught on, only for plutocrats who would probably have enough leftover cash to fund a Most Dangerous Game if they’d just move to Jersey instead. [The New York Times]

16.0
Average number of vacation days taken by the American worker last year, a 35-year low and down from 21.1 days in 1996. Somewhere the French are mocking us. Oh, also, you’re going to ruin your kids if you don’t take vacation days, a new study says. [Harvard Business Review]

25 percent
Right now the Trans-Alaska Pipeline is operating at only 25 percent capacity. As demand for oil has bottomed out, Alaska — which derives a substantial portion of its revenue from the petroleum business within its borders — is trying to find a way to crank up production. [BBC]

91.4 percent
That’s how accurately umpires have called balls and strikes during the MLB playoffs through Oct. 10, compared to the season average of 91.6 percent. Not bad, umps, but we’re still keeping our eyes on you. [FiveThirtyEight]

98.4 percent
The Kansas City Royals faced the Houston Astros on Monday, and just as it appeared the Astros had the game on lock — leading 6-2 with the bases loaded, and FanGraphs giving them a 98.4 percent chance of victory — the Royals grabbed the game back, going on to pull in four runs in two innings. [FanGraphs]

101 words
An 82-year-old Georgia woman named Serpentfoot is trying to change her name to a 101-word articulation of her philosophy. We here at FiveThirtyEight, a site that is admittedly a mouthful, wish the very best of luck to Nofoot Allfoot-69-mouth-tail-solids-liquids-gases-animals-vegetable-mineral-all-predators-and-prey-that-consume-and-move-with-feet-fins-wings-wheels-canes-roots-limbs-vines-landslides-dust-wind-water-fire-ice-gravity-vacuums-black-holes-going-over-under-around-and-through-Our-Greater-Self-our-habitat-the-cosmos-of-which-we-are-but-part-and-where-all-life-feeds-upon-other-life-from-the-smallest-atoms-or-bacteria-to-the-great-black-holes-and-dog-eat-dog-and-“Last-Suppers”-where-we-are-what-we-eat-or-consume-and-each-lives-on-in-the-other…∞ Serpentfoot in her petition to the state. [Times Free Press]

$43.6 million
Remember all that bad press last week about how employees of one daily fantasy site were caught using inside information to play at a rival daily fantasy site and win a ton of money in the process? I bet you thought it would spell some sort of negative consequence for the industry, right? Maybe distrust among the players, or perhaps a negative impact on revenue? Nah. FanDuel and DraftKings pulled in a combined $43.6 million in entry fees this past weekend, the largest haul for the pair ever. [Bloomberg]

447,776,222 euros
How much Greece owes the International Monetary Fund in a payment due today. The nation is expected to be paying off creditors well into the 2050s. Let’s just see how this payment goes. [The Wall Street Journal]

$20 billion
Annual cost of illegal fishing worldwide. A renegade illegal fishing crew that led authorities on a 10,000-mile chase was convicted Monday in a São Tomé and Príncipe court. [The New York Times]

$67 billion
Dell bought cloud storage company EMC for $67 billion in one of the largest-ever transactions in the technology business. [Wired]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 games
Chase Utley of the Los Angeles Dodgers was suspended for two games after a dirty slide broke the leg of New York Mets shortstop Ruben Tejada. Utley will appeal. [Associated Press]

4 percent
That’s Rand Paul’s support in a recent CBS News poll. It’s also just above the 3 percent needed to make it to the main stage of the next GOP primary debate on CNBC at the end of the month, rather than the J.V. debate, leaving Paul on the fence, along with Chris Christie and Mike Huckabee. [The Washington Post]

52 years
The Department of Agriculture is forecasting Florida’s orange crop will be the lowest it’s been in 52 years due to a citrus disease. This sounds, for all intents and purposes, like something that would happen in “Trading Places.” [Bloomberg]

68 percent
China has a massive public health crisis coming, with 68 percent of Chinese men — compared to 3.2 percent of women — smoking cigarettes. In the next decade, 1 in 5 male deaths in China will be smoking-related. [Quartz]

158 families
Donors from just 158 families have forked over $176 million to presidential hopefuls in the early phases of the campaign, about half the total haul so far. [The New York Times]

$3,891
Chicago is still in the hunt for a trip to the World Series, with a chance at its first title since 1908, when the Ottoman Empire was still around. As a result, prospective tickets for a home game in the series are wildly expensive: On the ticket sales site TiqIQ, the average asking price is $3,891. [Bloomberg]

$200,000
Amount South Carolina spends annually on dam maintenance and safety. After suffering catastrophic flooding, the notoriously stingy state infrastructure spending — highway maintenance is currently tethered to a gas tax that hasn’t gone up since 1987 — will have to rise to rebuild devastated thoroughfares. [U.S. News and World Report]

1.02 million
We have the first look at how Trevor Noah’s stint on “The Daily Show” is going: In the new host’s first week, the show averaged 1.02 million viewers, about two-thirds its audience at the same time last year. What’s weirdest about the show’s audience, though, is that it’s older: The median age of a viewer was 45.5 in Noah’s first week, a jump from 43.7 in Jon Stewart’s last. [Deadline]

$4.6 million
How much money the House committee on Benghazi has spent over the course of its investigation, which has increasingly targeted former Secretary of State and current Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton. [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
*
Just like he wanted, college professor and Democratic presidential candidate Lawrence Lessig finally made his way into a live-interview poll. A Fairleigh Dickinson poll found that support for Lessig is less than 1 percent, a mere asterisk in the the Democratic primary. For context, former Maryland governor and rounding error Martin O’Malley is polling at 1 percent. [Fairleigh Dickinson University]

2 weeks
You know all those ludicrous “sexy” Halloween costumes? Sexy Donald Trump (the wig covers the most of the costume), Sexy Pizza Rat (a rat costume with pizza on it), Sexy Hurricane Joaquin (I made this one up; you just skip out on the party in Brooklyn everyone said you’d show up to) and Sexy Cecil the Lion (a lion with some leg)? Well, someone is making a dime off them, and that someone is Chad Horstman, CEO of Yandy.com, the headline-generating site that’s able to turn around a sexy, news-pegged costume in a mere two weeks. [Maxim]

2:10
In the 2014-15 season, hockey teams pulled their goalies — a last-ditch effort to increase offensive manpower at the expense of defense — with roughly 2 minutes and 10 seconds left on the clock, on average, 30 seconds earlier than in the 2013-14 season. [FiveThirtyEight]

$3
$12.2 million has been spent on TV advertising for candidates and their associated groups in the 2015 Kentucky election, which breaks down to about $3 per eligible voter. [Center for Public Integrity]

6 emoji
Remember that story about a “dislike” button for Facebook? Yeah, it’s way dumber than that: Facebook is testing out six new emoji to add nuance to the classic “I acknowledge this post with this thumb” interaction. [Refinery 29]

$9.99
Netflix is cranking up its monthly subscription price from $8.99 to $9.99, with people who joined before May 2014 seeing the hike take place in May and those who joined later seeing the hike next October. [Mashable]

48 hours
Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy pulled out of his doomed race for the Speaker of the House yesterday, leaving a huge vacuum in the GOP House leadership. Republicans are turning to Rep. Paul Ryan, the former vice presidential nominee who apparently does not want the thankless gig. Say what you will about the guy, but Ryan is a smart man who likely does not want to have the worst job on Earth. Still, following a call from outgoing Speaker John Boehner Thursday, Ryan cancelled all fundraising and political events for the next 48 hours. My god, they’re gonna eat him alive. [The Washington Post]

57
Beef is pretty expensive these days, but pork is very cheap. As a result, a lot of restaurants have been offering deals on pork dishes: In the first eight months of the year, there were 57 limited-time-only pulled pork dishes at the top 500 restaurants in the U.S. I have very little shame and I have extremely low standards, so the moral of this story is that I think I need a McRib. [Bloomberg]

$600,000
The former California home of an armored-truck driver who admitted to stealing upwards of $1 million was raided by the feds, who found $600,000 buried in the backyard. Man, can you imagine how the current residents feel? Like 600 Gs were just sitting in their backyard, and anyone with a shovel was able to score the loot? The moral of this story is that gardening is a worthwhile hobby and all should pursue it given the opportunity. [Yahoo News]

$15 billion
Meituan, a Chinese startup that deals in a Groupon-esque model, and Dianping, another Chinese startup that delivers meals and restaurant deals, are merging in a $15 billion deal, the largest tech merger in China. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4-0
The Chicago Cubs beat the Pittsburgh Pirates 4-0 Wednesday night in the National League wild-card game (check out our live blog for a recap), meaning that the boldest forecast in the history of forecasting or boldness is still on the table. [ESPN]

10 years
Artemisinin, a first-line treatment for malaria, just scored its developers a Nobel Prize in medicine. Problem is, malaria is a parasite and parasites are good at evolving, so parasitology experts believe artemisinin will be obsolete within five to 10 years. I am not a doctor, but I advise that if you plan on getting malaria, you should aim to do so within the next five to 10 years. [FiveThirtyEight]

52 weeks
The Gates Foundation is offering its 1,382 employees a year of paid leave after the birth or adoption of a child. [The Huffington Post]

40 members
Approximate strength of the “Freedom Caucus” within Congress, a group of hard-line Republicans who came out Wednesday backing Florida representative Daniel Webster for the speakership over Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy. Provided that bloc holds, McCarthy would not have enough votes to win the top spot in the House on the first ballot. [The Washington Post]

90 days
FIFA’s ethics committee has voted to hand down a 90-day provisional suspension to the soccer organization’s president, Sepp Blatter. The news here is not the suspension, but the fact that FIFA actually has an ethics committee. Who is on this committee? Snidely Whiplash? Lex Luthor? Resuscitated Richard Nixon? Victor Von Doom? Is it just several bales of hay with crayon-scrawled-on-paper-plate faces stuck on them? Is this the same committee that runs sensitivity training for The Brotherhood of Evil Mutants or OSHA on the Death Star? The concept that anyone within FIFA is tasked with maintaining a sensible degree of ethical behavior is insulting to the intelligence of soccer fans. More to the point, where have they been for the past ever? [BBC]

487 clients
A preliminary deal was struck earlier this week between the U.S. and 11 other pacific nations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. A lot of negotiating on the trade pact was going on domestically, too — a Center for Responsive Politics review of lobbying disclosures over eight years found 487 different clients paid lobbyists to hit up government officials to plead their case on the TPP. [The Center for Responsive Politics]

535 phone numbers
People Magazine, typically regarded as a celebrity gossip magazine, has published the 535 phone numbers corresponding to each senator and member of Congress and has asked readers to call their representatives about how to respond to mass shootings. [The Week]

$700,000
The White House will spend $700,000 on standing desks, presumably due to the craven political pursuit of trends that so plagues our society. People built a civilization sitting down to work, folks — believing anything else is merely ergonomic arrogance. [Mashable]

1,360,747
Number of homeless students in the United States, about twice the number there were in the 2006-2007 school year. Part of this increase is due to improved data reporting: States are getting better at identifying homeless students. [FiveThirtyEight]

$20 million
A state judge rejected a proposed change to the name of Paul Smith’s College to Joan Weill-Paul Smith’s College. The change was proposed after Weill offered $20 million to the upstate New York school in exchange for getting her name on the door, but Smith’s will appears to forbid it. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2.5 meters
That’s the standard height for a crocodile pit in Ratchaburi province, Thailand. Is that an esoteric figure? Sure. But believe me, if you lived in Ratchaburi, you’d want to be damn  sure the pits used by farmers to raise crocodiles were up to code. Crocs are kept by area pig farmers, who feed the crocodiles meat they can’t otherwise sell at market and then eventually sell the crocs’ skin and meat — a solid business venture. But “several” baby crocodiles recently escaped a farm and set off a panic, so Big Government is stepping in over the next couple of days to make sure the Crocodile Industrial Complex isn’t playing fast and loose with the regulations. Thank god I live in America, where (I assume) the Second Amendment protects my right to raise unlicensed crocodiles for the protection of my apartment without such government intrusion. [Bangkok Post]

2.8 percent
Cigarette shipments are set to rise for the first time since 2006, with deliveries in the U.S. growing 2.8 percent in the first six months of the year compared to the first six months of 2014. [Bloomberg]

25 percent
The Energy Information Administration expects fuel bills to be substantially lower this year than last winter, with homes heated by oil seeing a 25 percent decrease in fuel bills and those heated with natural gas seeing a 10 percent drop. Even if this winter is 10 percent colder than the forecast, all major heating fuels will see either lower or neutral costs compared to last year. [EIA]

43 percent
Planned Parenthood, which angers the right, and the N.R.A., which needles the left, are both really popular all things considered, with approval ratings of 45 percent and 43 percent, respectively. Be sure to bring this up at Thanksgiving dinner — I’m sure it’ll go over great. [The Washington Post]

70 years
While the vast majority of the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement is still under wraps, New Zealand let it slip Tuesday that the pact will require the nation to increase the length of its copyright protections from 50 years after the death of a work’s creator to 70 years, matching U.S. copyright law. [BoingBoing]

$5,000
Rory McIlroy tossed his 3-iron into a lake earlier this year, drawing a fine from the PGA. The golfer recently revealed that the PGA reduced the fine for the offense from $25,000 to $5,000 because he apologized on television immediately afterward. [ESPN]

6,000 inmates
The Department of Justice will release roughly 6,000 federally incarcerated drug offenders in order to cut overcrowding. A third are foreign citizens set to be deported, and the rest will go through halfway houses and back into society. It’s the largest one-time release of federal inmates. [The Washington Post]

20,000 to 40,000
There’s life on Mars, probably — the issue is that we may have put it there. At the 2011 launch of the Curiosity rover, there were an estimated 20,000 to 40,000 heat-resistant bacterial spores on the robot, and NASA has to do a lot of work to make sure that any analysis to ascertain the presence of life on Mars isn’t influenced by the germs the rover brought with it. [The New York Times]

$73.8 million
The Houston Astros had the lowest payroll of any playoff-bound Major League Baseball team at the start of the season at $73.8 million. Last night, the Astros felled the New York Yankees in the one-game AL Wildcard playoff, shutting out New York 3-0. [The Associated Press]

$99.7 billion
Anheuser-Busch InBev, the company that makes swill like Budweiser, Busch, Michelob and the stalwart Natty Light, has offered to buy rival beer manufacturer SABMiller, the empire behind Miller and the beer responsible for my substantial senior-year weight gain, Miller High Life. SABMiller previously rejected two offers, so we’ll see how this unholy proposal pans out. The companies are the two largest in the beer market. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 percent
That’s the percentage of Maryland Democrats who said they would support Martin O’Malley, former Maryland governor and Democrat, in a presidential primary against Hillary Clinton, Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders, according to a new poll. Needless to say, things do not appear to be well on the home front for O’Malley. [Goucher College]

4 games
A mere four games into the 2015 NFL season and with a record of 1-3, the Miami Dolphins fired head coach Joe Philbin on Monday. The team has performed abysmally on defense despite spending the second most in the league on defensive line contracts. Tight ends coach Dan Campbell takes over as interim head coach. [ESPN]

12 nations
The 12 participating pacific rim nations have arrived at a final agreement in the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal. Japan, Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Peru, Mexico, the U.S. and Canada are all involved — notice anyone missing there? — and now all the Obama administration has left to do is get the deal through Congress, so no big.* [The New York Times]
*It is a big.

25 percent
A new study published in JAMA Internal Medicine reported that minorities and the unemployed faced 25 percent longer wait times to see a health-care worker. White Americans, on average spent 80 minutes waiting to receive care, while black Americans spent on average 99 minutes. [The Washington Post]

35 percent
Percentage of education debt attributed to Americans over the age of 40, up from 25 percent in 2004. Still, it’s not pretty for the under-40 crowd either: A college-educated head of household under 40 owes more on his student loans per month, on average, than his family spends on groceries. [The Associated Press]

41 games
Raffi Torres of the NHL’s San Jose Sharks was suspended 41 games — half a season — for a brutal (and very illegal) check on Jakob Silfverberg of the Anaheim Ducks in a preseason game. Torres has been, by Deadspin’s count, suspended four times, fined thrice, and warned twice for aiming for the head. [Deadspin]

$1,200
About 45 percent of PriceWaterhouseCoopers employees joined the accounting firm in entry-level positions in the past five years, which means a lot of them are contending with student loan debt. As a result, the company will next year start offering $1,200 per year to recent grads to help pay down their debt. [USA Today]

20,520 words
“Hamilton,” the hit musical about the nation’s first treasury secretary that is absolutely impossible to get tickets for, crams a whole lot of words into its run time. With a 2 hour and 23 minute cast album and 20,520 words of lyrics, the hip-hop influenced musical averages an impressive 144 words per minute. It’s a tough book to memorize, but if my Spotify listening history says anything, I am definitely committed to it. [FiveThirtyEight]

$350,000
Totally-not-gambling daily fantasy sports sites have been hit with their first scandal: A DraftKings employee allegedly leveraged internal information about betting patterns in order to place winning bets at rival site FanDuel, winning $350,000 on a $25 wager. The companies made a joint statement denying any wrongdoing. (Also, full disclosure, DraftKings has advertised on this very column before.) [Deadspin]

$300 million
American Apparel filed for bankruptcy protection, reaching a deal with creditors to cut its debt from $300 million to $135 million. The company has had one quarter of positive net profit since 2010, not exactly a hallmark of a healthy going concern. [Quartz]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
$4.52
The average out-of-network ATM fee in the U.S., a record high. That’s up 21 percent over the past five years. [The Wall Street Journal]

9.6 percent
According to the World Bank, 2015 will be the year that the percentage the global population living in extreme poverty drops below 10 percent. The development group forecasts 9.6 percent of the world population, 702 million people, will live in extreme poverty this year, down from 12.8 percent in 2012. [The World Bank]

53.9 pounds
How much beef Americans will consume per capita in 2015, the lowest level of consumption since the government started tracking the number in 1970. As a result, beef prices are dropping across the board. [Bloomberg]

60 percent
Des Moines, Iowa, is seeing the highest rate of millennial home-buying in the country: Sixty percent of people who got a mortgage to buy a home in Des Moines in the first half of this year were millennials. Nationally that figure is 37 percent. [The Atlantic]

65 percent
Percentage of Republican-leaning voters who prefer that a candidate for the presidency has new ideas over experience or a longstanding record. That, uh, explains a lot, I suppose? [Pew Research Center]

71 percent
Percentage of Republicans who have a favorable view of George W. Bush, who happens to be the brother of GOP presidential candidate Jeb Bush. That’s according to a New York Times/CBS News poll from May. Further internal polling numbers are leading some members of the Bush camp to call for the former president to campaign for his little brother in South Carolina. But others believe support from George could hurt Jeb in the general election. [The New York Times]

350 rolls of toilet paper
The New York Jets played the Miami Dolphins in London’s Wembley Stadium on Sunday, a game that saw New York come away with a 27-14 win. As part of the team’s trip planning, a Jets intern apparently advised that the toilet paper in London is of inferior quality. So the team hauled over 350 rolls of top-tier American TP to be safe. [The Washington Post]

$800
Iraq’s Sulaymaniyah Museum makes deals with smugglers, buying up looted artifacts in order to prevent them from getting onto the black market to presumably be lost forever. This strategy seems to have panned out, with the discovery that a clay tablet bought in 2011 for $800 contained a previously unknown 20-line verse of “The Epic of Gilgamesh.” It’s pretty crazy that for half of what some of my friends are paying in New York City rent, they could have purchased a priceless artifact. [LiveScience]

$13 million
LinkedIn agreed to pay $13 million to members who felt bombarded by the social networking site’s — let’s just say dedicated — email notification policies. Anyone who was a member from Sept. 17, 2011, to Oct. 31, 2014, and used the “add connections” feature may want to check their email if they want to get a piece of the settlement. [Quartz]

$55 million
“The Martian” narrowly missed beating out “Gravity” for the highest-grossing October release record, pulling in $55 million over the weekend. It’s got Matt Damon in one of his brainiest and dreamiest roles, according to in-depth FiveThirtyEight statistical research. [Variety]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
8 Chick-fil-A registers
Chick-fil-A, which hooked me during college with chicken sandwiches that made me briefly forget all closely held ethical beliefs, is opening a location in Manhattan. The chain expects its new store at 37th Street & 6th Avenue will have more traffic than any other store. And it will, if I have anything to do with it. The Manhattan Chick-fil-A has a phalanx of eight registers, with two more on standby, and mobile devices to ring people up. Remember folks: They stopped giving to anti-gay places, plus the war’s over and we won. Enjoy the chicken. [The New York Times]

8.01 percent
It’s October, so it’s breast cancer awareness month. But all that “awareness” doesn’t always translate into legitimate investment in cancer research. For example: Only an estimated 8.01 percent of the revenue from NFL breast cancer awareness merchandise goes to cancer research. [Business Insider]

17 percent
Percentage of C-suite executives who are women, according to new data from LeanIn.org and McKinsey & Co. [The Wall Street Journal]

42 percent
Percentage of women who reported they used tampons, according to a CDC study. About 62 percent reported using pads. (Some women used both.) Here’s what’s particularly interesting about all this: That survey was from 2004, and apparently nobody’s been interested in analyzing the health choices of half the population since. [FiveThirtyEight]

47 gigabytes
Edward Snowden joined Twitter, but made the basic mistake of not turning off email notifications. According to Snowden, he received 47 gigabytes worth of notifications from all the follows, favorites, retweets and direct messages. [@Snowden]

88.7 percent
That was the cash burn rate for the Hillary Clinton campaign over the summer; she raised $28 million and spent about $24.8 million. The Clinton camp has about $32 million in walking-around money right now. [The Washington Post]

90.5 points
That’s the over/under for the upcoming Texas Tech-Baylor college football game, the highest on record since 1990. Needless to say, these teams score a whole lot of points. [ESPN]

$5.4 million
Congress is taking action following the revelation the Department of Defense paid 14 NFL teams $5.4 million over four years to salute the troops during its broadcasts. This year’s National Defense Authorization Act will ban such payments, so the NFL will have to be pro-The Troops on its own dime. [NJ Advance Media]

$310.5 million
Someone from Three Rivers, Michigan, won a Powerball jackpot advertised at $310.5 million. The Powerball lottery will soon be changing its odds, which if done right will lead to bigger jackpots. That would be great, because the lottery is my favorite thing, and I am so bored of jackpots in the $300 million ballpark. [ABC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
4.4 percent
The New England Patriots are currently 3-0, leading some to speculate they’ll go undefeated through the rest of the year. According to my colleague Neil Paine, there’s a mere 4.4 percent chance of this happening. And according to Prophecy, even if it does happen, the New York Giants will beat the Patriots in the Super Bowl. [FiveThirtyEight]

5 attempted hacks
Russian hackers made five attempts to access the private email server of Hillary Clinton. There’s no evidence those attempts worked, and the U.S. government is currently dealing with a massive hack of Office of Personnel Management data, so I’m close to considering this a win for the Clinton camp. [Associated Press]

9.8 percent
Percentage of respondents to a Suffolk University poll who, when asked to describe Donald Trump in one word, said something like “idiot,” “jerk,” “stupid,” or “dumb.” And it’s not like the entire remaining 90.2 percent had nicer things to say either. [Business Insider]

45 employees
The Secret Service, which has lately been carrying out its duties with the professionalism of elementary schoolers with off-brand Nerf guns, is being scrutinized for accessing — and maybe leaking — information on a member of Congress investigating the agency. Secret Service employees dug up Rep. Jason Chaffetz’s unsuccessful 2003 application for a job with the agency “starting 18 minutes after the start of a congressional hearing in March about the latest scandal involving drunken behavior by senior agents… At least 45 employees viewed the file.” [Associated Press]

66 percent
Percentage of South Carolinians who said removing the confederate battle flag from state grounds was the right decision, about 50 percent of Republicans and 85 percent of Democrats. [Winthrop University]

115 miles per hour
Hurricane Joaquin is building up power near the Bahamas, and was upgraded to Category 3 status with sustained winds of 115 miles per hour. And Joaquin is forecasted to become a Category 4 storm. If you’re on the east coast, it’s always important to be prepared in the event of a big storm, so be sure to hit up the liquor store today before the lines get too long and the good stuff sells out. If you think I’m joking, and I mostly am, keep in mind that the City of Los Angeles Emergency Management Department confirmed my advice on Twitter early Wednesday night. [Capital Weather Gang]

200 servers
Yahoo! recently donated 200 servers to Howard University and The University of Texas at El Paso, a historically black college and a predominantly Mexican-American university, respectively. It’s part of an effort to increase diversity in the technology field, and at Yahoo! in particular. [TechCrunch]

6,500 meter summit
The Nepali government, after an explosion in the number of people attempting to climb Mount Everest, is considering instituting new requirements on the age and ability of climbers. Under the proposed rules, climbers would have to be between the ages of 18 and 75, climbers with disabilities would not be allowed to summit Everest if they cannot do so on their own, and each climber would need to have another 6,500 meter climb under their belt. [Outside]

$25,000
The top salary in the National Women’s Hockey League, belonging to Kelli Stack of the Connecticut Whale. There are 72 players in the league. [ESPN]

$5 million
Reward the U.S. is offering for information that disrupts the sale of antiquities looted by ISIS. [The Hill]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 Twitter account
Edward Snowden, who leaked documents from the National Security Agency two years ago before fleeing to Russia, has set up a Twitter account. He follows one other account: the NSA. [The Washington Post]

17 roster transactions
Life in the NFL can be tough; players get bounced around from team to team, and signed and released over and over again. One such player — Julian Vandervelde, currently an offensive lineman for the Philadelphia Eagles — has seen 17 such transactions since he was drafted in 2011. Most of those were with the Eagles in some way, shape or form. [Philly Voice]

23 endorsements
Number of endorsements Jeb Bush has accumulated from members of congress. That’s great and all, but they’re mostly a bunch of moderates, which doesn’t really help him build a broad base in the modern GOP. [FiveThirtyEight]

24 geniuses
On Tuesday, the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation — you know, the people who brought you NPR — announced the 24 recipients of the MacArthur “genius grant,” a $625,000 no-strings-attached stipend. Winners include Ta-Nehisi Coates (“Between The World And Me“) and Lin-Manuel Miranda (“Hamilton“). [The New York Times]

$670.44
The most expensive Google ad keyword in the U.S. is “San Antonio car wreck attorney,” costing $670.44 each time someone on Google clicks the ad. The most expensive advertisements are for legal issues, as a given client can be worth a whole bunch of money for an attorney, and it’s a crowded market. [Quartz]

700,993 arrests
Number of marijuana-related arrests in 2014, up for the first time since 2009. [Motherboard]

1 million UAVs
The FAA expects that one million consumer-use drones will be sold during the holidays this year. That’s pretty terrifying when you consider the inevitable black-out-the-sun possibilities of armies of untrained aviators hitting the beaches and parks next summer. Then again, free drones if you can catch them with a butterfly net, right? [Popular Mechanics]

$2.5 million
San Francisco 49ers owner Jed York wanted to pave over youth soccer fields in order to build the football team’s new stadium, and during the construction process promised to rebuild them. Now, shiny new stadium in hand, York does not want to pay the $2.5 million to rebuild those soccer fields. [San Jose Mercury News]

$343 million
German media conglomerate Axel Springer has purchased a controlling stake in Business Insider, that Web site I used to work for and all of my friends either work at or used to work at. Axel Springer bought all but 3 percent of the shares, spending $343 million to crank up its stake from 9 percent to 97 percent. This is fantastic news, mostly because I heard Pam has equity and she owes me a drink. [The New York Times]

$732 million
ComScore purchased rival audience measurement company Rentrak on Tuesday in a stock deal, valuing the latter company at $732 million. The combined company is still an order of magnitude smaller than the biggest player in the game, Nielsen, which has a market cap of about $16.7 billion. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
