
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

<1 percent
Missouri was the site of not one but two neck-and-neck primary races, with an incredibly slim margin separating Sen. Ted Cruz and Donald Trump, each of whom gained approximately 41 percent of the vote, and slightly more than 1,000 votes separating former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders, each of whom got about half the vote. The races are close enough that absentee and provisional ballots could swing the results, even though 100 percent of precincts have reported. [ABC News, CNN]

11 months
After an 11-month campaign in which he was, at times, considered the presumptive establishment nominee of the Republican party, Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida has suspended his campaign leaving only three remaining candidates — Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, and local businessman and current front-runner Donald Trump, the winner of the Florida primary. If I got the previous sentence as an email this time last year I would have laughed and laughed and laughed. Now, not so much, you know? [ABC News]

18 meters of tweed
A racehorse showed up to the Cheltenham Festival dressed in a three-piece tweed suit, which truly must be seen to be believed. I am not from the U.K. but after reading up on the festival — it is a “prestigious jump meeting” for horses where people wear a lot of tweed — I now understand why England has had as many revolutions as it has. It took 18 meters of tweed to outfit the horse, enough to clothe 10 literary studies professors. [CNN] 

24 hours
The D.C. Metro will shut down for an estimated 24 hours starting midnight due to safety fears about the dilapidated and frequently flammable transit system. The day will be spent doing emergency inspections of cables. Kids get off scot-free playing hooky from school and people in the D.C. area are encouraged to telecommute, which means nothing is going to get done. Washington is broken. [The Washington Post]

$58.73
How much quarterback Matt Cassel received as a performance bonus for his brief time on the Buffalo Bills last year. Cassel played one snap before being traded to Dallas, where his bonus was $28,241.22. Ten NFL players received a performance bonus less than $500 last season. [ESPN]

64 percent
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump each achieved a massive win in the state of Florida. While Trump took 46 percent of the vote, he got each of the 99 delegates up for grabs in the winner-take-all state. Clinton on the other hand won about 64 percent of the vote, and due to the delegate allocation of the Democratic primary will expand her delegate lead over Sen. Bernie Sanders by a substantial amount. As Clinton knows far too well, Democratic primaries are won and lost by such delegate leads. [ABC News]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

3 charged officers
Brandon Matthew Sontag, Nicole Lynn Quijas and Jorge Arroyo — three Santa Ana police officers who were caught on camera in June apparently eating candy bars and destroying video cameras at a medical pot dispensary they had just raided — were each charged with misdemeanors by the Orange County District Attorney’s office for damaging the video equipment. As for the weed edibles? The DA says there’s no evidence that the officers consumed any marijuana products, and what they were eating on camera was nothing more than “snacks available to staff.” Right. Sontag was also charged for vandalism for allegedly destroying the video cameras. [OC Weekly]

17 seconds
This Friday is huge for soon-to-be graduates of U.S. medical schools, as it’s when they’ll be told their residency hospital match by the National Residency Match Program. It’s been 23 days since they submitted their ranked preferences, but here’s the weird thing: According to one medical student’s replication of the matching algorithm — it’s based on the Gale-Shapley algorithm, and while the NRMP’s specific implementation of the algorithm and its input data isn’t public, it can be spoofed — the actual matching of 34,000 some-odd applicants to 30,000 some-odd hospital sots only takes 17 seconds on some basic hardware. So why the crushing 23 day wait? Well, there’s a lot of credential verification that has to go on. After all, these are doctors we’re talking about here. [Medium]

51 percent
According to the Engaging News Project at the University of Texas at Austin, that’s the percentage of Americans who do not comment on news stories and also do not read the comments on news stories. Only 14 percent of Americans had posted a comment on the stories, while the rest are presumably lurkers. [Nieman Lab]

70 percent
The University of Connecticut is the huge favorite to win the NCAA Women’s Basketball tournament, based on a FiveThirtyEight analysis of the bracket released yesterday. The Huskies have made it to the Final Four the the past eight years. [ESPN, FiveThirtyEight]

99 delegates
Today is pretty huge for this election. On the GOP side, both Florida and Ohio will allocate their respective 99 and 66 delegates to whoever wins a mere plurality, and there’s a solid chance that is Donald Trump in each state. This could be the de facto end of the line for mainstream opposition to the Trump bid. On the GOP side, 367 delegates will be up for grabs; on the Democratic side, there will be 691 pledged delegates. Just like last week, I’ll be on ABC News’ live stream intermittently from like 7 p.m. onwards with more coverage of the primary contests. Check it out! [FiveThirtyEight]

$733 million
Sony will buy out the stake held by Michael Jackson’s estate in Sony/ATV Music Publishing, their joint music business. Sony is paying a $733 million lump sum for the 50 percent stake with future payments to come. This will give Sony control over 4 million songs, which is nice in the era of streaming. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

2 years
In today’s edition of “stories that made me ignore my best friends during brunch on Saturday because they hooked me that good,” Richard Simmons has disappeared from public life for the past two years, has reportedly cut off ties with old friends, and those friends fear he may be held against his will in his home, the Daily News reports. Seriously, “Hey you hear about this Richard Simmons thing?” was basically the only thing I said to people for the rest of the day. [The New York Daily News]

8 minutes
Louisiana is in a dire financial situation and state legislators had to pass some pretty big tax increases, despite their misgivings, just to keep the lights on. Parts of the state will see sales taxes rise above 10 percent, and overall approximately $1 billion in new taxation was passed in the final eight minutes of the session. [The Advocate]

10 pounds
Ten pounds of bat guano — poop, that is — was found above the desk of Ken Lawson, a Florida regulator. That sucks, don’t get me wrong, but imagine being the cop assigned to investigate this particular crime. Your place on the totem pole becomes pretty clear pretty immediately when you pull that assignment. [Associated Press]

19 percent
The University of Kansas has the highest chance of winning the NCAA Division I men’s basketball tournament — March Madness! — based on the FiveThirtyEight model. (The women’s bracket will be announced later today.) The other No. 1 seeds are the University of North Carolina, Oregon and the University of Virginia. [FiveThirtyEight]

20 percent
Average estimate of the likelihood of a recession in the next 12 months according to a monthly survey of economists, down from 21 percent a month ago but up from 10 percent six months ago. [The Wall Street Journal]

11,000 data centers
The federal government has a lot of data, OK? A new policy would force agencies to get permission from higher-ups before building a new data center, which seems silly until you hear that the Feds already have upwards of 11,000 data centers. The outdated tech housed within — some of it predates the ’80s — makes up about three quarters of the $80 billion IT budget. [Nextgov]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

1 in 3
According to the White House, the share of families who have a hard time affording diapers. A new program will give low-income Americans access to cheaper diapers. [CNN]

21 years old
California’s legislature has voted to raise the age limit on buying tobacco products to 21 from 18. The bill now awaits the governor’s signature. The legislation would also apply to vapers who use electronic cigarettes, a move that would surely devastate the guy who is somehow walking in front of me every day on the way to work blowing sick clouds. [Associated Press]

59 percent
Percentage of Florida Republicans who think Sen. Marco Rubio should suspend his campaign should he lose in the winner-take-all primary in the state next Tuesday. Sad! [Washington Post/Univision News Poll]

29.0
People are jazzed about this whole democracy thing America has going on right now: 29 percent of eligible voters cast ballots in the states that held primary contests through March 6. That’s the highest level of turnout since 2008, but keep in mind that as we continue through the primary process and the contests potentially become less significant, that share may drop. [Pew Research Center]

1,700 names
A list of purported Islamic State members has been obtained by intelligence agencies, Sky News reports, but there’s plenty of reason to be skeptical of the list. It apparently includes tens of thousands of names, but only 1,700 identifiable ones. This is the kind of list where you really want to be sure it’s legit in case of a false positive, but it’s a potentially massive intelligence gain for the powers fighting the Islamic State. [The Washington Post]

11,000 amendments
Number of proposed amendments to the U.S. Constitution. Only 27 of those stuck, and many of the rest were really, really dumb. To commemorate the 225th anniversary of the Bill of Rights, the National Archives is apparently pulling everything it has from the “HORRIBLE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS, A-F” filing cabinet. [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

2
Well the final results are in, and it appears that Marco Rubio won a total of two delegates in Hawaii after being shut out of Mississippi, Michigan and Idaho on Tuesday. Just a dismal showing. [FiveThirtyEight]

23.2 percent
Percentage of songs in the Billboard Hot 100 in the 2010s that had a one-word title, an all-time high. [Priceonomics]

25 percent
Percentage of the 600,000 early voters in the Florida Republican primary who did not vote in GOP primaries in 2010, 2012 or 2014. Donald Trump’s performance has been strong among new voters, something that could hurt Marco Rubio substantially in next week’s primary. [The Wall Street Journal]

39 hours
Seven Democrats filibustered in Missouri’s Senate for 39 hours in an attempt to block a religious freedom bill that opponents say is anti-gay. The Republican majority voted to pass it. [The Washington Post]

40 percent
An analysis of 74 U.S. newspapers found that 40 percent of them published online mugshot galleries, a traffic and readership bonanza for the papers but a practice that raises ethical concerns and hits the accused where it hurts, in the Google search results. [Fusion]

150 times more likely
Several West Virginia lawmakers have fallen ill after taking a celebratory drink of unpasteurized milk after successfully passing a bill that allowed for the sale of unpasteurized milk. The CDC says unpasteurized milk is 150 times more likely than normal milk to cause food-borne illnesses. [Daily Kos]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

0
Number of delegates Marco Rubio obtained in the Mississippi and Michigan Republican primaries on Tuesday due to his failure to win at least 15 percent of the vote in those states. He also failed to win any delegates in Idaho. [ABC News]

3 to 8 percent
A study of 2 million European firms found that an additional woman in senior management or on the board of directors was associated with a higher return on assets of 3 percent to 8 percent. [Quartz]

45 percent
Percentage of mammals that are ugly, according to a new study out of Australia. Well, not exactly: The research sorted species into three categories — “good,” “bad” and “ugly” — and found that adorable animals (“good”) were the subjects of disproportionately more academic research than invasive species (“bad”) or gross-looking, janky, phoned-in, busted-up animals (I’m using the scientific jargon, but, more succinctly, the “ugly” ones). Of the animals inventoried, 45 percent fell into the latter category. [The Telegraph]

50 percent
Massive upset in Michigan: While every poll had Hillary Clinton in the lead in the Democratic race, with several indicating she was well ahead, Bernie Sanders won the Michigan primary instead, with 50 percent of the vote to Clinton’s 48 percent. This is far and away one of the largest upsets in primary polling history. [FiveThirtyEight]

91 percent
Percentage of millennials who use a phone to make a purchase at least once a month, according to a market research firm. Churches appear to be interested in tapping into this behavior, and a new app — named Tithe.ly, of course — lets people use their phones to cough up for the collection tray. [Bloomberg]

$200,000
The FBI alleges that a man who worked for the armored transport company Brink’s stole $200,000 in quarters from the Atlanta Fed over the course of nearly two months. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

13 percent
This could get rough: According to a Monmouth University poll in Michigan ahead of Tuesday’s primary vote, Marco Rubio is way behind in the Republican race with 13 percent support. The poll of likely GOP voters shows Donald Trump with 36 percent support and Ted Cruz with 23 percent. John Kasich of all people has 21 percent. I’ll be on ABC News’ live stream from 8 p.m. onwards with more coverage of the primary contests. [Monmouth University]

$13-13.50 per hour
Costco, the world’s second-largest retailer, announced plans to increase its starting wage from $11.50 to $12.00 per hour to $13 to 13.50 per hour, the first bump since 2007. [Business Finance News]

92 percent
Probability of Donald Trump winning the Michigan Republican primary, according to FiveThirtyEight’s polls-plus forecast. That chance is 97 percent in our polls-only forecast. [FiveThirtyEight]

$45,000
Opening bid for the chair that J.K Rowling sat in to write the first two books of the Harry Potter series. The chair is up for auction next month and will presumably sell for more. But it will never stop being weird that the chair where Rowling wrote two of her worst books is worth enough to feed a family of four for a year. [ABC News]

$450 million
Apple will pay a $450 million settlement in an antitrust suit after the Supreme Court declined to hear its appeal. The Justice Department and 30 states had sued Apple over alleged collusion with publishers to crank up the price of ebooks. [Bloomberg]

$4.5 billion
Amount invested in third-party off-campus housing last year. For developers trying to insulate themselves from real estate cycles, student housing has proved a prudent investment. Still, as a College of William & Mary graduate, I can’t really understand the appeal, given that the value of the real estate in Williamsburg, Virginia, is predicated on the idea that “George Washington Slept Here,” “Thomas Jefferson urinated here, allegedly” or “James Madison got turned down for a second date here.” [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.

2 contests
Marco Rubio, the Republican establishment choice, has now won two of the 20 contests the GOP has held in states and territories to select its presidential nominee. He won the Minnesota caucus last week and had a big win in Puerto Rico on Sunday. But it’s looking increasingly difficult for Rubio to win an outright majority of delegates to score the nomination given the results so far and the state of the campaign in upcoming states. [The Washington Post]

7 months
After announcing a melanoma diagnosis seven months ago, former President Jimmy Carter says he no longer needs treatment for the cancer. Doctors will continue to monitor his health, but he’s looking good, and can get back to single-mindedly annihilating an ancient plague from this earth with the incandescent fury of a man seeking to accomplish one last thing before he is greeted by a then-wounded Death. [ABC News]

10 to 50 microwatts
Researchers at the University of Washington are working on new Wi-Fi hardware that consumes power at a vastly lower rate than current technology — something on the order of 10,000 times less power than typical Wi-Fi equipment. [Wired]

17 seasons
Peyton Manning is expected to announce his retirement today after 17 seasons in professional football. Manning is an undisputed shoo-in for the Hall of Fame; indeed, looking at the stats from just half of the years he played shows a career good enough on paper for the Hall of Fame. [FiveThirtyEight]

55 delegates
Bernie Sanders had a good weekend, winning the Democratic contests in Nebraska (57 percent to Hillary Clinton’s 43 percent) and Kansas (68 percent to Clinton’s 32 percent). Still, Clinton will walk away with more delegates from the “super Saturday” contests after routing Sanders in Louisiana. [NPR]

447 crossword puzzles
A group of crossword enthusiasts believe they have found a plagiarist in their midst: Since 1999, hundreds of puzzles distributed by Universal Crossword and printed in USA Today have looked suspiciously like puzzles first printed elsewhere. For example, 65 puzzles appear to have lifted their themes directly from New York Times puzzles. [FiveThirtyEight]

$1,262
According to a local man who tried it, that’s how much it costs for a New York City resident to eat Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson’s absurd diet — which involves 2.3 pounds of cod per day, plus chicken, vegetables, eggs and steak — for a month. [FiveThirtyEight]

$1 million
How much the average Arby’s restaurant makes in a year. That’s a new record for a brand once reviled for its disgusting sandwiches that remains reviled for it disgusting sandwiches but somehow sells far more of them, judging by consistent sales growth over the past five years. [BuzzFeed]

$3 billion
Louisiana is in pretty dire fiscal straits: The state is short about $3 billion to cover services over the next 16 months, and Gov. John Bel Edwards has given the GOP-controlled legislature a deadline to figure out a way to keep the state afloat. [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 
