
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
1 downed plane
NATO has called an “extraordinary meeting” after Turkey shot down a Russian warplane near the Syrian border. Russia claims the plane was over Syrian airspace, but Turkey claims it had crossed the border into its territory. [The Washington Post]

4.90 seconds
Lucas Etter, age 14, is the first person to solve a Rubik’s cube in less than 5 seconds in a sanctioned competition. A few months ago I tried to learn how to solve a Rubik’s cube as a party trick, and I can basically get it down to the last part, but only after a couple of minutes. Lucas makes me look like a blind pirate when it comes to Rubik’s cubes. [FiveThirtyEight]

12 minutes, 5 seconds
Earlier this year, NBC rolled the dice. They let Donald Trump appear on “Saturday Night Live” for 12 minutes and 5 seconds, and the episode pulled in a huge viewership. But now NBC needs to offer equal time to candidates who are, shall we say, less of a draw. John Kasich, Mike Huckabee, and Lindsey Graham are all confirmed to appear later this week in some markets and on this weekend’s SNL. 12.08 minutes have also been allotted to human rounding error and former Virginia Gov. Jim Gilmore. [Variety]

50-42
According to a new national ABC News/Washington Post poll, Hillary Clinton, the former Secretary of State, is only slightly preferred to Donald Trump, a local entrepreneur, when it comes to a candidate’s perceived ability to handle terrorism. [The Washington Post]

51 percent
That’s the percentage of Americans who say it’s the U.S. government’s responsibility to make sure Americans have health insurance, the first time that figure has been greater than 50 percent in seven years. [Gallup]

250 grams
The FAA is asking that any drone that weighs more than 250 grams now be registered with the agency. [TechCrunch]

18,120
The number of NYPD arrests involving marijuana as of Oct. 20. That’s 40 percent lower than it was last year. [New York Post]

1.4 million
Number of chlamydia cases in 2014, the highest number of cases on record, according to a new report Tuesday. The Center for Disease Control estimates that there are 20 million new STD infections per year. Because of antibiotic resistance, syphilis and chlamydia have become as difficult to treat as they are to spell. [USA Today]

$4.6 billion
Petco, the company that sells stuff for pets, was purchased by CVC Capital Partners and the Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board for $4.6 billion. [Bloomberg]

$19.5 billion
Amount spent annually on cable set-top boxes, about $231 per person per year. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
31 percent
A new Suffolk University/Boston Globe poll gives us a glimpse of an alternate timeline where Mitt Romney entered the 2016 presidential campaign. Thirty-one percent of New Hampshire voters say they would vote for Romney if he were magically on the ballot, which is probably really only helpful for people who can travel across the multiversal plane. [The Boston Globe]

47 to 86 percent
Red Lobster, a chain that serves ostensibly fulfilling seafood, will increase the size of the shrimp in its menu offerings by 47 to 86 percent, depending on the dish. The upgrade affects 70 percent of entrees. [BuzzFeed]

54 years old
Median age of an NPR listener this year, up from 45 in 1995. This trend is worrisome for people at the public radio organization and has led to efforts to recruit new on-air talent. [The Washington Post]

56.1 percent
With 100 percent of votes tallied, Democrat John Bel Edwards defeated Sen. David Vitter 56.1 percent to 43.9 percent Saturday in Louisiana’s gubernatorial election. A top issue of the campaign was Vitter’s alleged dalliances with prostitutes. Vitter also announced this weekend that he will not pursue re-election to the Senate when his term is up. [The Lens]

60 lawyers
Of the 83,963 people who took the bar exam to become attorneys last year, 60 of them skipped the traditional step of, you know, going to law school. It’s apparently allowed for a lawyer to become official by serving as an “apprentice” under a practicing attorney or a judge. According to last year’s results, 17 of the 60 apprentices who took the bar exam passed it. [Priceonomics]

1,111 carats
A massive diamond was found in a mine in Botswana last week. It’s been reported as 1,111 carats, which is helpful for people who know what carats are. I am not one of those people, so I looked it up, and a carat is 200 milligrams (0.2 grams), which is now in metric and thus still not super helpful for Americans. A 142-carat stone weighs an ounce, so we’re talking a half-pound diamond here. [Motherboard]

6,300 documents
About 6,300 census documents thought to have been destroyed after World War II were found in the walls of a Budapest apartment. They appear to be early records used in Nazi plans to send the 200,000 Jews of Budapest to death camps. [The Guardian]

$17.4 billion
A new report from Merrill Lynch projects the global personal robot market to be $17.4 billion in 2020. One major growth sector is robots that care for the infirm, which is especially promising in Japan, where an aging population means there is more demand for elder care than younger Japanese can supply. [Tech Insider]

$150 billion
In important-but-boring merger news, drug giants Pfizer Inc. and Allergan PLC have agreed on terms for a merger worth $150 billion. As a result, Pfizer will be able to be based in Ireland, where corporate taxes are less of a thing, rather than the U.S., where taxes are considered a rather important thing to pay, generally speaking. [The Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
15 years old
Ahaan Rungta, a 15-year-old who obtained the entirety of his elementary and secondary education from online courses provided by MIT, has been accepted to college at MIT. [MIT News]

28 percent
Percentage of white New Yorkers who approve of the job Mayor Bill de Blasio is doing, an all-time low, according to a poll from The New York Times and Sienna College published this week. [WNYC]

30 years
On Nov. 20, 1985 — 30 years ago today — Microsoft launched the first version of Windows. Happy anniversary, and here’s to many more, Microsoft!
Sent from my iPhone. [The Verge]

93 percent
A study at an all-you-can-eat pizzeria found that men who dined with women ate 93 percent more pizza than men who dined with other men — roughly one and a half more slices. This research, out of Cornell University, has inspired a brilliant television show pitch: I host a total and complete reshoot of every episode of “Man vs. Food,” except the entire rest of the cast and crew consists of women, propelling me to victory. Come at me, Food Network, you know this is gold. [Slate, Springer]

289-137
The House voted 289-137 Thursday to require FBI background checks and sign-offs from at least three U.S. officials before allowing Syrian and Iraqi refugees — you know, the huddled masses yearning to breathe free — into the country with refugee status. That vote margin is enough to override a threatened presidential veto. [Yahoo News]

$1,500-$1,800
LAX is set to open up a VIP terminal that will cost users $1,500 to $1,800 per trip. That fee will allow the patrons of the Los Angeles Suite to drastically cut the walk to the plane, enjoy its lounges, and identify themselves as enemies in the forthcoming class war. [The Guardian]

52,000 people
Wiretaps that may very well have been illegal have intercepted the text messages and calls of more than 52,000 people in the Riverside County area of California since mid-2013. Courts there were responsible for approving about a fifth of U.S. wiretaps in 2014. [USA Today]

$106,445.56
Joe Campbell, a trader, shorted a stock on E-Trade and got completely wiped out to the tune of $106,445.56. This led to one of the most craven but interesting GoFundMe pages seen in a very long time. Hey, at least he’s not some bigoted restaurateur. [MarketWatch]

130,000 people
From 2009 through 2014, about 870,000 Mexicans came to the United States. On the other hand, 1 million migrated from the U.S. to Mexico in the same period, meaning that over the course of five years the net shift was 130,000 people to Mexico, according to a Pew Research Center report. [USA Today]

$73 million
Bryce Harper of the Washington Nationals was named the National League MVP Thursday after leading the league in wins above replacement. Relative to his salary, the Nats may have gotten one of the best deals in history: Based on the approximate dollar value of WAR, Harper’s wins would be worth $75.4 million on the open market, compared to the $2.5 million he is in fact paid. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
14 faces
A 14-faced die was located in a tomb near Qingzhou City in China, indicating the existence of a board game known as “bo” at least 2,300 years ago. A skeleton was also discovered, and as I understand it, the poor fellow had a series of exceedingly bad rolls and had to forfeit the quest. But it should be clear that I’m not an archaeologist. [Live Science]

23 percent
Donald Trump is currently leading in a poll of New Hampshire Republicans, with 23 percent of the vote according to a new WBUR survey. [Bloomberg]

50 percent
Taxi companies have filed a lawsuit against New York City regulators, with one alleging it has seen leasing income drop by as much as 50 percent as a result of increased competition from ride-hailing companies such as Uber and Lyft. [Ars Technica]

53 percent
Percentage of Americans opposed to an effort to continue resettling Syrian refugees. A further 11 percent would only settle Syrian refugees if they were Christian. [Bloomberg]

94 percent
Ninety-four percent of respondents in a new survey said that it was very or somewhat important that people in our country could practice their religion freely. Good to know, ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah’nagl fhtagn. [Pew Research Center]

136 years
In part because of the El Niño forming in the Pacific, this October was the hottest of 136 years on record. [Bloomberg]

370,000
Approximately 370,000 customers were without power following a wind storm that pummeled Washington State. [K5]

422 million
Last week, “Reclining Nude” by Amedeo Modigliani sold for $170 million at an art auction, a debt apparently settled using an American Express card. As a result, the buyer, Liu Yiqian, will obtain 422 million American Express points, or roughly 28 million frequent flyer miles. [The New York Post]

3,324 episodes
“The Soup” on E!, which for the past 12 years has been anchored by Joel McHale, will come to an end after a run extending since 1991, the year after I was born. As of today, 3,324 episodes of the weekly program have aired. [The Wrap]

28.3 million
Average viewership of Sunday’s Patriots-Giants game, the most-watched NFL broadcast of the season so far for CBS. Did the Giants lose 27-26? Yes. Did the Giants lose to a triumphant and cocky Patriots squad? Sure. Did Eli Manning barter with a New Orleans woods witch during his youth in order to curse the Patriots and ensure a quadrennial Super Bowl? Do I look like a cop? All I’m saying is that the Giants might make the playoffs, and God knows I’d watch this prophecy manifest once more. [Awful Announcing]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
-1.1 percent
For the first time in more than a decade, the Bakken oil fields of South Dakota produced less crude oil in September than they did in the same month the year before. My colleague Ben Casselman wrote last year about signs that North Dakota’s oil boom is unsustainable. [Bloomberg]

14 candidates
Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal suspended his presidential campaign Tuesday, bringing the number of candidates vying for the GOP nomination down to an eminently reasonable and fundamentally manageable 14. [FiveThirtyEight]

15.71 seconds
Kenichi Ito of Tokyo has locked up the world record for a 100-meter dash sprinted on all fours. He’s a veritable Usain Bolt of poor understanding of well-regarded running form. [The Telegraph]

25 bombers
Russia showed up big time to the aerial bombardment campaign against the Islamic State yesterday, following the determination that a Russian passenger flight was brought down in a terror attack. Russia said it hit 14 ISIL targets with 34 cruise missiles and sent 25 bombers — a substantial chunk of its bomber wing — to join the opposition. [The Daily Beast]

46 percent
A new survey from Gallup found that 46 percent of girls in the seventh through 12th grades were “very confident” they could learn computer science, compared to 62 percent of boys. [Fusion]

52.9 percent
Percentage of college students who enrolled in the fall semester of 2009 who earned an associate or bachelor’s degree within the next six years. For-profit colleges in particular had dismal graduation rates. [FiveThirtyEight]

2 million
Every day I go through the Lincoln Tunnel, four lanes known for unfathomable gridlock, but the only traffic that still intimidates me is the traffic in Los Angeles. So it’s not a huge surprise that the city is the largest U.S. market for Waze, an app that offers drivers alternate routes in real time, with 2 million users in the area alone. The issue is that the alternate routes Waze suggests are often residential streets, and LA residents kind of hate the app for sending traffic to their humble detours. [The Wall Street Journal]

$50 million
More from the Russia Really Doesn’t Mess Around file: The government is offering a $50 million reward to anyone who helps find those responsible for planting a bomb onboard the destroyed plane. [Reuters]

$1 billion
Lyft, the “is Pepsi OK?” of on-demand car service apps, predicts it will hit $1 billion in gross annual revenue based on its October performance. [Reuters]

$4.5 billion
The American Medical Association, which represents 250,000 doctors, came out against direct-to-consumer advertising for prescription drugs, a $4.5 billion-per-year industry in the United States. Banning such advertising will presumably set back this nation’s stand-up and sketch comedians a generation, not to mention the advertising executives who for years have had to find a tasteful way to talk about older men getting erections on family-friendly primetime television. [AdWeek]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
27 states
Twenty-seven governors announced their opposition to allowing refugees of the civil war in Syria into their states. Those states include Alabama, Michigan, Ohio, Mississippi, Florida, Texas and Louisiana — and they all have something in common. So far 250,000 people have been killed in Syria’s civil war, and more than 11 million of the 22 million people who lived there have fled their homes. [CNN]

$35
Cherry Hill Mall in southern New Jersey will charge patrons at least $35 to sit with Santa and tell him all the crap they want. Listen, if demanding Philadelphia-area kids want to have a portly man over-promise and under-deliver on what he’s going to do for you in December, my understanding is that Chip Kelly will do it for free. [Philly.com]

168 raids
The French Interior Ministry said it had conducted 168 raids as of Monday morning searching for individuals connected with the attacks in Paris last Friday. So far 23 suspects have been detained. [NPR]

1,000
A project from The Guardian devoted to tracking the number of people killed by U.S. police has counted 1,000 deaths caused by law enforcement so far this year. [The Guardian]

£600,000 a week
Star soccer player Lionel Messi, currently of Barcelona, is kicking the tires on a potential move to the English Premier League. But any team interested in the impossible player will have to pay dearly for him: Messi reckons he wants £18 million per year after taxes, or £600,000 a week. Perhaps one of the petrochemical billionaires behind one of the U.K. clubs can shake out his couch cushions and find the money. [ESPN FC]

$10 million
Overstock.com, the e-commerce retailer, has $4.3 million worth of silver and $6 million worth of gold hoarded at an off-site facility in Utah, apparently a rainy-day fund in the event of an economic catastrophe. [BuzzFeed]

$75 million
Music streaming service Rdio is shutting down, with Pandora paying $75 million for some remaining assets. [BusinessWire]

$95.5 million
For-profit education company Education Management Corp., which owns the Art Institutes, South University, Argosy University and Brown-Mackie College, settled with the Justice Department for $95.5 million over allegations it overstated career-placement opportunities to students and paid recruiters with illegal enrollment incentives. The company admitted no wrongdoing as part of the settlement, which it will pay through 2022. [PBS]

$1 billion
Ballast Point Brewing & Spirits, a craft beer brand, was purchased by Constellation Brands, the mainstream beer-producer that makes Corona and Modelo for the U.S. market, for $1 billion. The craft beer business is growing at a massive clip — by 18 percent in barrel volume in 2014 — compared to mainstream suds, which saw tepid 0.5 percent growth by the same measure last year. [Reuters]

$12.2 billion
Marriott International agreed to buy Starwood Hotels & Resorts — the company behind Sheraton, Westin, and W hotels — for $12.2 billion. The result would be the world’s largest hotel company, with a total 1.1 million rooms. [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
2 rounds
Ronda Rousey was knocked out for the first time in her UFC career, going down in the second round against underdog and the anti-Rousey Holly Holm. [Los Angeles Times]

10 percent
According to Pornhub, a website that provides the exact services you think it does, traffic plummeted by 10 percent when “Fallout 4,” a hotly anticipated video game, became available to the gaming public. [VentureBeat]

10.4 percent
The Chicago Cubs will increase season ticket prices by an average 10.4 percent following a run at the World Series and forthcoming deals with free agents. [ESPN]

19 percent
Following a wild weekend of college football, Alabama is now the most likely team to win the national title, with a 19 percent chance according to FiveThirtyEight’s model. [FiveThirtyEight]

20 bombs
With 129 reported dead from the terror attacks in Paris, France has taken an increased role in combating the Islamic State, coordinating a 20-bomb campaign in northern Syria. [Sky News]

1,000 resignations
More than 1,000 members reportedly resigned from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints following the announcement that the Mormon church would no longer baptize the children of same-sex couples. [The New York Times]

1,900 spies
U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron announced that the government will hire an additional 1,900 spies for its intelligence agencies MI5, MI6 and GCHQ following the terror attacks in Paris. [The Telegraph]

71,871
Denver Broncos quarterback Peyton Manning has surpassed Brett Favre’s record for most career passing yards. Manning now has 71,871 yards, but was pulled from the field in the third quarter of Sunday’s game against the Kansas City Chiefs in favor of backup QB Brock Osweiler. [Pro Football Reference]

$10.3 billion
Amount collected by public universities from student fees to support athletics programs over the past five years, according to a Chronicle of Higher Education and Huffington Post investigation. A lot of schools are beginning to question how much that investment is really worth. [Chronicle of Higher Education]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
6 percent
Last night the New York Jets played the Buffalo Bills, and for once it wasn’t a disappointment only for the Jets: Having the Bills clad in red and the Jets adorned in green meant that the game was inscrutable for red-green colorblind fans, an affliction that 6 percent of men have. [Deadspin]

25 mph
A Google driverless car was pulled over Thursday for driving too slow, the company said. Google caps speeds for the vehicles at 25 mph. [The Verge]

30 people
In the latest attempt to plumb the depths of the “significant” part of this column’s title, here’s this: A skateboarding bulldog named Otto set a world record after boarding through a tunnel made by the legs of 30 people in Peru. Have you ever done that? No? Well, you’re just going to have to live with the fact that this dude is way gnarlier than you for the rest of your life. [BBC]

$40 per hour
Cost to rent a surrogate mom in Brooklyn, New York. Nina Keneally is offering her matronly services at an hourly rate to counsel and reassure disaffected millennials in the borough through her Need A Mom company. I think we did it, guys. I think we took the gig economy too far. [The Daily Beast]

40.8 percent
Percentage of Iowa Republicans who said they thought the state of the economy was poor, notable because the Iowa economy is actually doing really great right now. This dissonance could be a major factor in the upcoming election. [FiveThirtyEight]

165 years
When it comes to timeless styles, you really can’t do much better than buffalo check. What’s buffalo check? I want you to close your eyes and picture a bearded man chopping wood in the snow. His shirt? Red and black buffalo check. The 165-year-old style is coming back this year in all sorts of forms and remains a staple on retailers’ shelves each winter. [Adweek]

192,000
Fox Business Network enjoyed a viewership boost after it hosted a Republican primary debate Tuesday, with 192,000 viewers during a business day Wednesday, about double its number from the day before. [Talking Biz News]

631,187
Number of students who were scheduled to take the Suneung in South Korea on Thursday. The nationwide exam has a substantial bearing on the academic future of Koreans planning to enter university. [The Korea Herald]

1 million
Approximate number of U.S. households that would be affected by a proposed Department of Housing and Urban Development rule that would ban smoking in public housing units. The change would affect a lot of people in New York, where 400,000 people live in 178,000 New York City Housing Authority apartments. [The New York Times]

526 million
Number of Spotify streams of “Lean On” by Major Lazer & DJ Snake, currently the most-streamed song in the service’s history. Given that New York is in a cold snap and I’m getting in that mood, I expect to single-handedly take “Let It Go” past that bar by Christmas. [The Guardian]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
12 to 15 percent
Joe’s Crab Shack will experiment with ending tipping and paying employees more at some locations. The restaurant chain is testing increasing prices by 12 to 15 percent to account for the increased wages. [Eater]

39 light-years
MIT and Harvard researchers announced that they have detected a rocky planet orbiting a red dwarf star 39 light-years away. [The Boston Globe]

67 percent
Probability that Clemson University will make the College Football Playoff this year, the highest odds of any college, based on FiveThirtyEight’s prediction model. There’s also a 49 percent chance that Clemson will win out the rest of the season. [FiveThirtyEight]

70 percent
Just for some perspective on where the Democratic Party’s elected officials are lining up, presidential candidate Hillary Clinton has 70 percent of all possible endorsement points according to FiveThirtyEight’s endorsement tracker, compared with the 19 percent she had locked in at the same time in the 2008 cycle. [FiveThirtyEight via Harry Enten]

$4,000
The city of Seattle paid $4,000 to have a horrifying yet somehow iconic chewing-gum-covered wall power-washed clean, with a million estimated wads of gum eradicated from the edifice. This is an important step forward for the city, one hopes, because when a major cultural attraction for your metropolis is a vermin-sustaining wall covered with used chewing gum, you run the risk of people starting to side with the fault line that will doom your city to geological annihilation. [Gizmodo]

14,000 calls
Phone records obtained from a hack of Securus Technologies, which provides phones to jails, found 14,000 recorded conversations between inmates and their lawyers, a potential breach of attorney-client confidentiality. [The Intercept]

4.8 million
Dr. Seuss is the juggernaut of children’s literature, still by far the most popular children’s author years after his death. There were 4.8 million books by Seuss sold in 2013, up from 3.2 million in 2010. Seuss created some of the most iconic characters of kids’ literature, including the Cat in the Hat, the Grinch, the Lorax, and the most nefarious interrogation of the moral malleability of the soul and the banality of evil to ever appear on the page, Max the Dog from “How the Grinch Stole Christmas.” Seriously, when you really consider the character of Max, you get to some dark places quick. Think about it. [Priceonomics]

50 million
The Kars 4 Kids radio commercial — you know the one I’m talking about — is heard by an estimated 50 million listeners daily. I wager that sentence alone is worth a thousand pledge drive weeks when it comes to recruiting sustaining members of National Public Radio. [Vice]

$720 million
Amount wagered on Major League Baseball in Nevada in 2014, up 6 percent from 2013. The MLB remains haunted by the ghost of Pete Rose — a man who, to my knowledge, is still alive, but you know what I mean — and wants to make sure that no players are cheating to get in on that action. As a result they’ve hired SportIM to monitor the league and identify suspicious gambling activity. It’s the kind of system Kenesaw Mountain Landis — who is definitely dead; I checked — must have dreamed of. [Bloomberg]

$14 billion
Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce juggernaut, claimed $1 billion in sales in the first eight minutes of Single’s Day, the Chinese equivalent of Black Friday. The International Data Corp. forecast that the company would book $14 billion in total sales. These numbers should probably be taken with a grain of salt, but with $9 billion in sales by midday, Alibaba had a huge performance on one of the biggest shopping days of the year. [CNET]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
6 percent
Twitter is already gloating about the most recent stupid change to its UI, a switch from stars representing a “favorite” to hearts representing a “like.” Never before have I been pushed into an introspective period regarding my commitment issues by a user interface swap from a technology company, but that’s where we stood a week ago. Anyway, apparently people are using the button 6 percent more in the first week, but let’s see how this awful idea plays out in the long run. [BuzzFeed]

22 percent
Percentage of offices that provide free snacks and beverages, Nate. A 2011 study from Staples found that snack runs accumulated to 2.4 billion hours of lost productivity annually in the United States, Nate. [Bloomberg]

58 percent
Percentage of Americans who believe in the existence of a hell. Given this new data, we can conclude that at least 42 percent of Americans have never driven down that stretch of Interstate 95 between Washington and Fredericksburg. [Pew Research Center]

106 indictments
A grand jury handed down 106 indictments related to a biker brawl and shooting at a bar in Waco, Texas, in May. [WFAA]

200,000 emails
Comcast reset the passwords of 200,000 compromised customer email accounts after hackers obtained the passwords and offered them for sale. To add insult to injury, the act of clicking through and resetting the passwords, while ever so small, probably counted against the draconian data caps that Comcast has imposed on its customers. [CNET]

500,000
Approximate number of New York state residents who participate in daily fantasy sports, according to DraftKings. New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman on Tuesday ordered DraftKings and FanDuel to stop accepting bets in the state because their games constituted illegal gambling. This makes me furious, but only because I bet a bunch of money that it would be U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara who would lay down the cease-and-desist on daily fantasy in New York, not Schneiderman, in my Daily Fantasy Consumer Advocacy league. [The New York Times]

$2 million
Joel Hodgson, the creator of “Mystery Science Theater 3000,” announced a $2 million Kickstarter on Tuesday to revive the show. By 5 p.m. Tuesday the fundraiser had more than $500,000 in pledges, and by 8 a.m. today the Kickstarter was already past $900,000. [NPR]

$21 million
Estimated price that Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James paid for a home in the Los Angeles area recently. On the one hand, James has been involved in Hollywood with movies such as “Trainwreck,” but on the other, Cleveland fans have every right to get skittish when James buys real estate in other cities with decent basketball teams. [Variety]

$1.5 billion
Value of fine wine stored in an old mine outside of Bath, England. Humidity is kept at 80 percent, and the natural temperature is 55 degrees; the casks are stored for auction houses, investors and collectors. [Bloomberg]

$15 billion
Estimated global sales of soup this year, down from a peak of $16.2 billion in 2012. The shrinking market has led soup manufacturer Campbell’s to do some serious re-evaluation of its recipes, for instance planning to cut the ingredients in its chicken soup to 20 from 30. [The New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. 
