
Welcome to Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. 

$10 per month
SoundCloud has finally found what we in the world call a “business model,” and will charge users $10 per month to listen to music sans advertisements. Users also get access to music catalogs and the ability to save tracks for when the user isn’t online. [Bloomberg]

29 tour dates
The ’90s were pretty great, according to lots of people. Some of those people were musicians who did the vast majority of their successful work in the decade, but not much since. They have now banded together like some sort of bar trivia Justice League to headline the “I Love The ’90s” Tour. A murderers’ row of the “Now That’s What I Call Music” circuit is involved: Coolio, Color Me Badd, Kool Moe Dee, Vanilla Ice, Salt-N-Pepa and Kid ‘N Play. There are 29 tour dates set between April and October, coming to a pavilion near you. [Rolling Stone]

45.3 percent
A new study of 400 colleges from a retired Duke University professor has found that there are a lot more A’s being given out than there used to be. In 2013, 45.3 percent of grades at the schools were A’s, 33.6 percent were B’s, and 14.1 percent were C’s. In 1940, 14.9 percent were A’s and 35.2 percent were C’s. Grade inflation has been on a steady rise for the past few decades, according to the research. [The Washington Post]

171 delegates
Number of delegates obtained by Sen. Marco Rubio prior to his exit from the race. Rubio’s zombie campaign is trying to retain control over those delegates until the convention. But it has already lost some of them: the Cruz camp plucked five Rubio delegates from Louisiana. But as a certain frontrunner would say, exerting what leverage you can is a crucial part of the Art of the Deal. [The Associated Press]

$760 million
There are nearly 16,000 American babies that are born premature each year at least in part because of air pollution, according to a new study by a team of medical researchers. The extended hospital stays and medication the babies require cost $760 million annually. [Reuters]

$1 billion
Spotify has raised a billion dollars in debt financing from investors. The Swedish music company lost €162 million in 2014, when we last got a look at the company’s books. Since then, a whole bunch of competitors like Apple — and if you read the $10 entry of this post, now SoundCloud — have entered the streaming space. [Wall Street Journal]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


Welcome to Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. 

1.5 percent
Pre-tournament probability that Syracuse University would make it to the Final Four of this year’s NCAA men’s basketball tournament. But hey, guess what, here we are. In the last 11 tournaments, only three Final Four teams have been less likely to get there than this year’s Syracuse squad, according to FiveThirtyEight’s pre-tournament odds. I guess that means all the people who went to Syracuse in the office pool are going to win this year, but at least Syracuse isn’t Duke. [FiveThirtyEight]

5 words
A new study looked at 16 billion emails sent by 2 million people on Yahoo Mail. A Yahoo Labs and University of Southern California team found that when they looked just at messages sent between regular corresponders, the most-likely reply was five words long, and more than 90 percent of replies were sent within a day. Based on extensive personal experience, I figure that’s because if you don’t reply within a day, you will never reply. This is as good a time as any to remind you Email Debt Forgiveness Day is right around the corner. [Scientific American]

37,000 feet
An Alaskan volcano is spewing ash and detritus 37,000 feet into the air in a plume over 400 miles long. The Pavlof volcano, which is on the finger of Alaska that that juts westward towards Russia, began erupting Sunday for the first time since 2014. It’s no Eyjafjallajökul, but pilots are still steering clear of it. [CNN]

44,000 signatures
A petition signed by 44,000 people to allow open carry of firearms at this summer’s Republican National Convention was smacked down by the Secret Service, which basically said, “lol absolutely not, are you kidding?” [ABC News]

7 million people
The USGS is out with a new report analyzing risks to Americans who live in areas that may suffer from “induced earthquakes” because of high levels of fracking in an area. About 7 million people live in areas that could suffer such quakes. [The Washington Post]

$14 billion
Starwood Hotels & Resorts has been aggressively pursued by Marriott for a purchase, but just as a deal appeared done, an investment group led by Anbang Insurance Group Co. of China swooped in with a $14 billion offer, throwing several months of work from Marriott right out the well-appointed hotel room window. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


Welcome to Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Huge thanks to Neil Paine for covering for me when I was out with the all-March Madness SigDig. You can find him @Neil_Paine. 

74 delegates
Preliminary estimate for the number of delegates Bernie Sanders will win in Washington, which held caucuses Saturday. We just ended the part of the campaign with a large number of caucuses, terrain that favors Sanders. But for the rest of the cycle, most of the action is in primaries, contests Sanders has done relatively poorly in. [FiveThirtyEight]

808 subscribers
Subscription count for “Tomahawk and Long Rifle,” the quarterly publication of The American Mountain Men, a club for dudes who like doing DiCaprio-in-The-Revenant reenactments. Since the films came out, the magazine has seen interest rise and says it is now fielding six or eight new subscriptions per day. This bolsters my plan for how to save the news business, namely having Leonardo DiCaprio make movies about subjects of struggling magazines. [The Wall Street Journal]

1,901 appearances
Judging by their comic book lives, Batman and Superman are each others’ best friend, unlike what is implied in “Batman v Superman,” their grimdark movie that came out last weekend. They’ve appeared in at least 1,901 comic books together over their respective careers — Superman hangs out with Batman almost as much as he hangs out with his girlfriend, Lois Lane. The Bat hangs out with Supes more than any individual Robin. [FiveThirtyEight]

5,532 titles
Number of titles available on Netflix in the United States on March 23 based on the count of AllFlicks, a site that catalogs Netflix’s library. That’s way down from January of 2014, when Netflix had 8,103 titles, according to AllFlicks. Part of this drop could be the result of increased competition from other streaming services. [AllFlicks]

$100 million
The nation of Jordan will get a $100 million loan from the World Bank to create jobs for Jordanians and 100,000 of its 640,000 registered Syrian refugees. Lebanon will receive a similar loan to work towards universal enrollment in school for both Lebanese and Syrian kids by next year. [The Associated Press]

$170.1 million
“Batman v Superman: Dawn Of Justice” made $170.1 million in North America over the weekend despite reviews that ranged from tepid to scathing. It was the largest opening ever for March and also for any Warner Bros movie. [CNN]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


Welcome to Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. Regular host Walt Hickey is still on vacation, and NCAA basketball is still happening. As a result, I’m still here with another all-March Madness SigDig. Enjoy!

0.015 rating points
There are close matchups, and then there are close matchups. Tonight’s Notre Dame-Wisconsin tilt belongs in that second category, with the teams separated by just 0.015 points in Ken Pomeroy’s ratings. It’s basically as close to a coin flip as you can get — our prediction model lists the game as exactly 50-50 for both teams. [Kenpom.com]

19 percentage points
In a Sweet 16 field largely devoid of Cinderella candidates, 10th-seeded Syracuse will have to do. According to the FiveThirtyEight model, they started the tourney with a 1 percent chance of making the Final Four; now that probability is 19 percentage points higher, the biggest gain of any team left standing. [FiveThirtyEight]

1995 season
The University of Virginia will be looking to make its first Elite 8 appearance since the 1995 tournament when it takes on Iowa State Friday evening. By most measures — including winning percentage, the AP poll and the Simple Rating System — this year’s Cavaliers are better than the 1995 version, but they’ll have to win to prove it — the bracket doesn’t lie. [Sports-Reference.com]

3,950 wins
North Carolina and Indiana are two of the most storied programs in the history of college basketball, having combined for 3,950 victories in 5,728 games since 1901, and they’ll face each other in Friday’s late game. With a 73 percent chance of winning, UNC has the edge to take win No. 3,951, according to our model. [Sports-Reference.com]

118 wins
The University of Connecticut women’s basketball team has been completely unstoppable with Breanna Stewart leading the way these past few seasons. They’ve won 118 of their last 119 games — all by double-digits, and all but 18 by 20 or more points. UConn looks to extend their run against Mississippi State Saturday morning. [FiveThirtyEight]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And if you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey —  or to @Neil_Paine, I guess, if you feel like it.


--------------------------------


This is Significant Digits, your daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. With Walt Hickey away on vacation — and with the third round of the NCAA men’s basketball tournament getting underway tonight — I’m hijacking SigDig today and tomorrow in the name of March Madness. Enjoy!

6 ACC schools
Six schools in the Sweet 16 — Duke, Miami, North Carolina, Virginia, Notre Dame and Syracuse — hail from the Atlantic Coast Conference, setting a record (at least, since the NCAA Tournament expanded to 64 teams in 1985). The ACC had tied the previous record of five last season, so at this rate they’ll claim all 16 slots by 2026. [USA Today]

24.5 points
In their two NCAA Tournament wins thus far, Villanova has outscored foes by 49 combined points, or 24.5 per game — more than any other team in the Sweet 16 field. Granted, one of those games was against 15th-seeded UNC Asheville, but the Wildcats also beat No. 7 seed Iowa by 19 and have exceeded the scoring margin our Elo ratings would expect by 11.8 points per contest. They’ll try to keep that hot streak going tonight against Miami. [Sports-Reference.com]

63 points
Oklahoma’s Buddy Hield has enjoyed a season for the ages this year, and it’s carrying over into the NCAA Tournament, where he’s scored a tourney-best 63 points (31.5 per game) on a scorching 73.2 true shooting percentage. But maybe it’s best for the Sooners if Hield doesn’t keep that average up against Texas A&M tonight — Oklahoma was 4-5 in conference play this season when Hield scored 30 or more points, and 8-1 when the Sooner scoring attack was more balanced. [Sports-Reference.com]

5 starters
Each basketball team has five starters, and in the case of Maryland’s game against Kansas tonight, each Terrapin starter will be taller than the Jayhawk lined up across from him at tip-off. As a team, Maryland has the fourth-biggest roster in the nation, with an average height a good inch and a half taller than Kansas. But will it matter against the skilled Jayhawks? Our model says “probably not” — we’ve got Kansas favored with a 73 percent probability of winning, despite Maryland’s size advantage. [KC Kingdom]

109th best
If defense really does win championships, nobody clued in Oregon or Duke. The combatants in tonight’s late game ranked 43rd and 109th, respectively, in schedule-adjusted defensive efficiency this season, per Ken Pomeroy’s stats. Aside from their 116th-place finish in 2013-14, this year’s Blue Devils have given Coach K more defensive fits than any Duke squad since Pomeroy started crunching numbers 15 seasons ago. [KenPom.com]

More than $30 million
With those aforementioned six entries in the Sweet 16, the ACC stands to make a cool $30 million, at least, from an NCAA cash pool that rewards conferences when their teams go deep in the tournament. Naturally, none of that money will ever be seen by Brice Johnson, Malcolm Brogdon, Grayson Allen, Angel Rodriguez or any of the other players who powered those teams to the Sweet 16. [ESPN.com]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey —  or to @Neil_Paine, I guess, if you want.
CORRECTION (March 24, 5:35 p.m.): A previous version of this article incorrectly described the average height difference between the starters on Kansas and Maryland’s men’s basketball teams. Maryland’s starters are, on average, about an inch and a half taller, not a foot and half.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news.
Good news: I’m going on vacation starting tomorrow. Better news: Significant Digits will be run by my colleague Neil Paine on Thursday and Friday and will be all about March Madness! 

4-1
The Tampa Bay Rays defeated the Cuban national team 4-1 in front of President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro, who did the wave. Obama and Castro did the wave! [ESPN]

17.4 percent
Web traffic drop for Vice Media between January and February, which says less about the health of its core product — Vice.com’s traffic was up — and more about the crazy ways websites boost their numbers for advertisers. Basically, smaller websites sign away their audience numbers to larger sites like Vice in exchange for better ad rates. These small sites get better ad inventory, and the larger sites can claim a higher audience. But in February, Distractify, one of the sites that helped Vice pad its numbers, essentially imploded. Live by the click, die by the click. [Variety]

20 houses
Actor Jeremy Renner has been on a house-flipping spree in the greater Hollywood area, buying at least 20 houses in the past 15 years, renovating them and selling them for a profit. As far as hobbies go, it’s nowhere near “being Hawkeye,” but it’s neat. [Bloomberg]

58 delegates
Donald Trump had a decent night on Tuesday, winning all of Arizona’s 58 delegates. Utah, however, went hard for Cruz, and American Samoa will send its delegates to the Republican convention uncommitted. [FiveThirtyEight]

37.8 million
Approximate number of tweets from @VENETHIS on Twitter, or 15,000 per day since the user joined the service in 2009. That’s by far the highest number of tweets for any single account by a long shot. [FiveThirtyEight]

50 trillion stars
When you go fishing for supernovae, you have to cast a pretty wide net: Scientists were able to catch two stars — KSN 2011a and KSN 2011d — exploding, but did so by monitoring light every 30 minutes for three years from a field of 500 galaxies comprised of 50 trillion stars. Nailed it! [The Washington Post]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. 

1-in-3,333 chance of winning
Probability of the Texas A&M men’s basketball team coming back from a 12-point deficit against Northern Iowa with 35 seconds left, which is exactly what they did on Sunday. These kids will, for the rest of their life, get to be Han Solo barking “never tell me the odds!” at everyone from their accountant to their bookie to their GPS system. They have earned it. [FiveThirtyEight]

41 percent
Percentage of Americans who believe that climate change will pose a “serious threat” to them in their lifetime, according to Gallup. I suppose the people who still refuse to acknowledge the threat of climate change are teenagers, people in landlocked states like Arizona and Utah, or those weirdos obsessed with cruises and boat trips. [The Guardian]

73 percent
Compared to high school students in the 1980s, teens from 2010 to 2012 were 73 percent more likely to report trouble sleeping. That’s just one example among many — young people today report having far more mental health problems than in past generations. [Quartz]

92 percent
Utah and Arizona vote today, in the first Tuesday in several Tuesdays to not earn a distinctive superlative from folks like me. Trump has a 92 percent chance of winning in Arizona, according to our polls-plus model. Cruz has a 98 percent chance of winning Utah. And we don’t have a forecast for how Democrats in Arizona and Utah will vote because, well, Democrats in Arizona and Utah? We’re not wizards, people. (Seriously, though, it’s because there haven’t been enough polls of Democrats in those states.) [FiveThirtyEight]

$8,250
Cost for a suite during peak season aboard Carnival’s newest cruise to lovely communist Cuba. It will be the first U.S. cruise line to dock in Cuba in over 50 years. [Bloomberg]

£200 million
Cost to construct a polar research vessel to explore the Antarctic. The vessel will no doubt help us understand the complicated and fragile marine ecosystem of a remote part of this beautiful world. Because the Natural Environment Research Council decided to name the vessel based on an internet poll, the ship may, according to current results, end up with the name “RRS Boaty McBoatface.” Full disclosure: Support for this name is right up there with that flamethrower bill Rep. Eliot Engel of New York pitched in January when it comes to this column’s few political stances. [The Independent]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

16 percent
That’s the current “diversion rate” in New York — the weight of recyclables picked up by the city’s sanitation department divided by the overall weight of refuse hauled out. It’s much lower than the national rate of 34.4 percent. What gives? First, some businesses use private sanitation companies and aren’t part of the municipal system. Second — and this is, according to the Department of Sanitation, a bigger deal than one might think — recycling scavengers take recyclables off the curb and cash them in on their own. [The New York Times]

33 games
According to ESPN’s Stats & Info Department, the Golden State Warriors’ loss to the San Antonio Spurs on Saturday was the 33rd consecutive regular season game played at San Antonio that the Warriors have lost. [ESPN S&I]

42 percentage points
Ted Cruz’s lead over Donald Trump in Utah, according to a new poll from The Salt Lake Tribune. Mormons appear to dislike Trump … a lot. He’s doing poorly in Utah counties with higher mormon populations. Given the Mormon church’s experience with state-sponsored antagonism, Trump’s proposal to ban all Muslim immigration, specifically targeting a minority religion, is not likely to go over well among Utahans. Sad! [Salt Lake Tribune, Buzzfeed]

Georgia House Bill 757
The Georgia General Assembly passed a bill that would forbid the government from applying penalties to an organization that denies services to people that are gay as long as the organization feels such services would violate its religious beliefs. The Georgia law, which Gov. Nathan Deal may not sign, is a lot like that Indiana “religious freedom law” that sparked a backlash about a year ago. The NFL is not happy with Georgia and has dropped the hammer, basically saying — and I’m paraphrasing here — “gosh, that’s a nice looking stadium y’all are building in Atlanta. It would be awful if you enacted a law like this one because we would have to think really hard about not having a Super Bowl there, especially in 2019.” [Deadspin]

3.3 million miles
Congratulations, everybody! In all likelihood we will have, as a planet, successfully dodge two comets in as many days this week. Comet 252P/LINEAR passes us on Monday and comet P/2016 BA14 will blow by the earth on Tuesday, at distances of 3.3 and 2.2 million miles respectively. All I’m saying is if you’re having a tough day just remind yourself, “hey, we dodged a bullet today,” or whatever the Oort cloud could fashion as a rudimentary bullet. [Quartz]

$29.1 million
Domestic haul for “The Divergent Series: Allegiant,” which left it in second place at the box office during its debut weekend. We saw some early signs of this last year, but 2016 could be brutal for adaptations of young adult novels, previously a stalwart genre in Hollywood. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.
Also, welcome to the first day of FiveThirtyEight’s third year under ESPN. Yesterday was our 2nd birthday. Didn’t you see everyone partying in green until the A.M.? Yeah that was totally for us. 

0 for 124
Based on the low-but-not-zero probability of a 16 seed in the NCAA Men’s basketball tournament beating a 1 seed, by now we’d have expected at least one of them to have won a game. The probability of our current situation — where the record for 16-seeds is 0 for 124 — is only about 5 percent. [FiveThirtyEight]

2 ballistic missiles
North Korea, which just the other day sentenced a University of Virginia student to 15 years of prison and hard labor for allegedly stealing a poster, Friday appears to have shot 2 medium-rangeballistic missiles into the Sea of Japan. They travelled a distance of about 500 miles, according to the South Korean military. [ABC News]

6-12 inches
Because everything is awful and the moment you thought we all had a good thing going is fleeting, a Nor’easter appears to be developing that could very well dump a bunch of snow across the northeast. The New York office of the National Weather service says we can expect 6 to 12 inches from the storm. And just when I had switched from peacoats to hoodies, too. [Slate]

53 percent
It’s the kind of story that you cannot stop reading even though you slowly grow to loathe everyone profiled in it: There’s a huge rise in a group of clothing sales companies aiming to be “Brotailers,” that is, retailers that cater to bros and their ilk. A fashion PR agency found that 53 percent of adult men — adults! — described their style as “basic bro” rather than, say, “practical” or “professional” or whatever else grown men are calling khakis these days to feel cool. Still, men’s fashion has been the fastest growing thing in online retail over the past five years, so there is coin to be made that would otherwise presumably be spent on donating to the old frat, mediocre beer and the Gronk Cruise. [Bloomberg]

76.5 percent fresh
Median Rotten Tomatoes score of movies in which John Goodman is the second-billed performer, which is really good. The guy is at his best when he’s the stalwart #2 of a movie, which means that “10 Cloverfield Lane” doing so well among critics shouldn’t come as a surprise. [FiveThirtyEight]

90 percent sure
King Tut’s tomb may have two new chambers in it, which would be cool because the fella was married and we never did find Nefertiti. Based on a scan of the tomb with radar, Egyptian Antiquities Minister Mamdouh El Damati said that they’re about 90 percent sure they have located an additional 2 chambers. [CNN]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. We’re trying out a new approach, with fewer news items but more detail, so please bear with us.

3 delegates
Something very interesting happened in the state of Illinois among Trump voters. Home of weird elections, the state has some pretty odd election rules when it comes to delegates in GOP primaries. Namely, at the district level, Republican Illinoisans vote for 3 individual people who declare their personal preference for president, rather than the candidate they would prefer to get 3 generic delegates. Anyway! Turns out this practice may have hurt Trump in Illinois, mainly because three delegates with the last names of “Sadiq,” “Fakroddin” and “Uribe,” substantially underperformed their fellow delegates — all with, for all intents and purposes, hella white names like “Nordstrom,” “Minch” and “Hartmann” — to the tune of Donald Trump getting 3 fewer delegates than otherwise possible. [FiveThirtyEight]

7 senators
Number of Republican senators still seated in the upper house who voted to confirm Merrick Garland, President Obama’s nominee to replace former U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Antonin Scalia, in 1997. Five sitting GOP senators voted against him. [The Week]

15 years
A University of Virginia student who was arrested in North Korea for allegedly stealing a poster was sentenced to 15 years of prison and hard labor, according to reports on Wednesday. North Korea’s highest court found the 21-year-old Otto Warmbier guilty. [NPR]

94 percent
We’ve had a whole lot of election news over the past few weeks, but here is my secret favorite: Following Marco Rubio’s exit from the race, Predictwise has it as a 94 percent chance that the next President of the United States is from New York. That distinction is shared by Clinton, Trump and the declined-to-run-but-hey-anything-is-possible Michael Bloomberg. Sure, Fillmore left something to be desired and Van Buren lacked pizzazz, but hey, both of the Roosevelts were pretty rad — you guys should be excited for this! [Predictwise]

125 applications
Last year, a guy named Martin Shkreli cranked up the price of a rare anti-fungal drug used to fight the effects of AIDS from $13.50 per pill to $750. Now the FDA is trying to stop those kinds of shenanigans by expediting the review process for generic drugs that will compete with brand-name off-patent drugs that are only produced by a single company. Basically, competitors can get to the market faster, making the whole “profiteering from the dying” business model slightly less financially sound. FDA spokesperson Sandy Walsh told Bloomberg in an email that the agency expects up to 125 current applications will be expedited. [Ars Technica]

$700
Chipotle is having a bad time. Sales are even lower than expected, and the quarter that was supposed to be its rebound to the top was just more of the same. The last time Chipotle Mexican Grill stock was above $700 was back in October, before all this E. coli news dropped. The stock was recently teetering near $500. Still, that $700 number is now crucial for co-CEOs Monty Moran and Steve Ells, as a big chunk of their compensation is now tied to the stock hanging above $700 for 30 consecutive days. [Bloomberg]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
If you see a significant digit in the wild, send it to @WaltHickey. 
