
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5 hearings
Declared presidential candidate and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul appears to play hooky from homeland security hearings, attending just five of 73 committee or subcommittee hearings since January 2014. [Buzzfeed]

6-2 vote

A California bill to require schoolchildren to be vaccinated was passed out of a state Senate committee on a 6-2 vote, despite opposition from parents and one of the lesser Kennedys, who called inoculating children from deadly illnesses “a holocaust.” [Associated Press]

9 percent above inflation
College tuition is getting more expensive, but room and board charges are getting even more expensive. Over the past five years the cost of room and board has grown by 9 percent above the rate of inflation at public four-year colleges. [The Hechinger Report]


11 supplements
A new study found that 11 herbal supplements contained a synthetic compound that is a chemical cousin to amphetamines. [The Daily Beast]

20 to 30 years
Ellen Stofan, NASA’s chief scientist, said she believed there will be “definite evidence” of life — probably microbes — beyond Earth within 20 to 30 years. [NPR]

76 percent

According to the Pew Research Center, white Mormons are the most Republican American subgroup, with 76 percent favoring the party. The group that supports Democrats the most is black women ages 69 to 84, who leaned Democratic 89 percent of the time. [The Washington Post]

2,398,113 metric tons

That’s the quantity of animal feed the port of Los Angeles exports annually, much of it alfalfa. Due to trade imbalances, it’s apparently cheaper to export the alfalfa grown in California — and by the transitive property, lots of California water — than to transport it across the state. [Gizmodo]


2.4 million square miles

A huge sandstorm on the Arabian Peninsula raged for six days over the empty quarter of Saudi Arabia. [Discover Magazine]

$8.5 million in gold
An $8.5 million heist of gold from a mine in Mexico is considered an inside job by investigators, and will presumably be the plot of the movie to see in 2020. [Associated Press]

$730 million
Amount spent by J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. on hiring more compliance personnel, including for an internal surveillance operation to try to prevent the next London Whale or some other expensive incident of employees rigging markets. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 millimeter cubed
Researchers at the University of Michigan have unveiled a computer that is 1 cubic millimeter in size, one of the smallest computers ever. [CNET]

$15
Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul announced Tuesday that he was running for president in 2016. The senator also unveiled an online shop with all sorts of “Rand” branded wares, including a $15 “NSA Spy Cam Blocker” designed to obscure the webcam on some laptops with Paul’s campaign logo. And yes, discerning consumer, he accepts bitcoin. [Ars Technica]

17 episodes

More “Arrested Development” is reportedly coming to Netflix. Executive producer Brian Grazer told Grantland’s Bill Simmons that 17 new episodes will hit the streaming service. Although, there has been no confirmation from Netflix. [The BS Report via Slashfilm]

151 female critics
While women in the U.K. buy about two-thirds of the books, the people reviewing the books are far more male than female. In the London Review of Books in 2014, there were 527 men and 151 women critics featured. [The Guardian]

56 percent
Notoriously vulgar Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel won his f—ing re-election Tuesday night in a runoff against county commissioner Jesus Garcia. [New York Times]


63-53

The University of Connecticut Huskies beat the Notre Dame Fighting Irish to win the NCAA Women’s basketball tournament — just as the omens, and everyone else, foretold. [FiveThirtyEight]

112 years

Brontosaurus is back, people! After 112 years of paleontologists frowning at you and saying, “Uh, it’s actually ‘Apatosaurus,'” Brontosaurus is back. European researchers algorithmically analyzed skeletons to determine if differences in size and form were because of individual variation or multiple species, and decided on the latter. Next stop: Pluto. [io9]

2,000 customers
Washington was hit by a power outage on Tuesday that affected a reported 2,000 customers. Several of those customers happened to be the federal government, leading to flickering lights or outages at the State Department and White House. [CNN]

$638,142.64
That’s the amount of change left by travelers at airport checkpoints in the U.S. in 2013. That number rose to about $675,000 in 2014. [CNBC]

$1.2 million

The original 16-page draft of the lyrics to Don McLean’s “American Pie” sold for $1.2 million at auction Tuesday. [BBC]



If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
$1.90 per pound

How much Buffalo Wild Wings pays for chicken wings, up from $1.36 per pound a year ago. [Bloomberg Business]


3 to 4 times faster

Fingernails grow three to four times faster than toenails. What gives? Frequent use of the fingers could stimulate faster nail growth, but the jury is still kind of out here. [io9]

10 percent
It feels odd that it has to be said, but it’s not a great idea to purchase human breast milk on the Internet. A study in the journal Pediatrics found 10 percent cow’s milk in nearly a tenth of the samples it examined. [USA Today]

40 percent
Percentage of Internal Revenue Service employees who will be eligible to retire within the next four years. The agency is looking for an infusion of fresh blood, aiming for new employees younger than 30. [Bloomberg Business]

43 schools
New York City’s largest network of charter schools is Success Academy, which by the end of next year will have 43 schools. A proposal from Gov. Andrew Cuomo could eventually bring that total to 100 schools, making the charter school network bigger than the second-largest public school district in the state. [The New York Times]

45 percent

While California has been the focus of coverage of the drought in the West, northern neighbor Oregon is also suffering from drought conditions across 45 percent of the state. [Statesman Journal]

116 years old
The world’s oldest person, Gertrude Weaver, died in Arkansas Monday after holding the title for less than a week. [Arkansas Democrat-Gazette]

44 million

Number of Americans who get a physical each year. There’s some evidence that annual checkups are too frequent. [NPR]

$1 billion
The latest startup to become a “unicorn” — meaning it has a $1 billion valuation, something that used to be rare — is Razer, a company that specializes in computer accessories for gaming. [Fortune]


279 billion euros

That’s the Greek estimate for reparations from Germany for Nazi occupation during World War II. Greece is seeking to collect on debts as it contends with its own after 240 billion euros worth of bailouts from the EU and IMF. Germany says it paid Greece 115 million deutschmarks in 1960. [Reuters]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
5 minutes

Saturday saw what’s been described as the shortest lunar eclipse of the century, a five-minute “blood moon” seen best on the West Coast. [CNN]

18 years

Sentence for Kevin Bollaert, who was convicted of extortion for running a “revenge porn” website. [NBC San Diego]


27 states
At least 34 states must agree in order to call a constitutional convention. Twenty-seven have signed on to call for one regarding a balanced budget amendment, and campaigns are under way in nine more. [The Washington Post]

28 years in prison
Anthony Ray Hinton was set free Friday after spending 28 years on Alabama’s death row. New ballistics tests contradicted the evidence that put him behind bars for two 1985 murders. [The Guardian]

53 percent

According to FiveThirtyEight’s march madness model, that’s the University of Wisconsin’s chance of winning the NCAA Men’s tournament Monday night against Duke after dropping the undefeated University of Kentucky on Saturday. Should Wisconsin win, they very well may vindicate the “just pick the cutest mascot” bracket methodology I promoted at the start of this all. Go Badgers. [FiveThirtyEight]

1.4 million copies
Global sales of illustrator Johanna Basford’s “Secret Garden,” a coloring book intended for adults, so far. The book and a followup, “Enchanted Forest,” are at the top of Amazon’s sales list. [The Guardian]


2 million hours

Amount of time the professional services firm Deloitte spends each year evaluating the performance of its more than 65,000 employees. That’s time spent “completing the forms, holding the meetings, and creating the ratings.” [Harvard Business Review]

$143.6 million
Domestic haul for “Furious 7,” the latest film in the “Fast and Furious” franchise. [USA Today]

$4.8 billion
The size of the Chinese box office last year. The country adds about 15 new theaters every day and is a rising economic force in the motion picture industry. [The New York Times]

13 trillion electronvolts
The Large Hadron Collider is back and running again after a two-year rebuild. While they’re taking it easy on the atom-smasher for the time being, scientists plan to crank it up to 13 trillion electronvolts — double the peak achieved last time around — over the next few months. [BBC]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
1 appearance

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, who will reportedly announce a bid for the Republican nomination in mid-April, has been a ghost in Iowa. Despite being an active surrogate for the Joni Ernst Senate campaign during October, the senator has only appeared once in the Hawkeye State since then. [Buzzfeed]

4 for-profit colleges

The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs is investigating Berkeley College, Mandl School, New York Career Institute and Technical Career Institute because of high dropout and loan default rates. [The New York Times]


7’5″
The Sacramento Kings signed the first player of Indian descent in NBA history, the 7’5″ Sim Bhullar. [ESPN]



66 days at sea
Louis Jordan was recovered by a German cargo ship 200 miles off the coast of North Carolina after his sailboat was disabled in a storm 66 days ago. Jordan survived by rationing food, catching fish and collecting water from rain, presumably inspired to survive by the prospect of an inevitable and highly lucrative book deal. [NBC News]

100 hours of community service
Vanilla Ice will do 100 hours of community service in a plea agreement over charges he burglarized a foreclosed home. One day we will get justice for that time Vanilla Ice totally burglarized Queen & David Bowie, but today is not that day. [The Palm Beach Post]

About 1,000 listings
Only 4 percent of homes in Cuba have internet access. Nonetheless Airbnb, an app that allows people to sublet rooms to guests, has opened in the Cuban market with roughly 1,000 listings. [Bloomberg Business]

$50,000 relocation package
Salesforce CEO Mark Benioff has been one of the prominent opponents of a controversial Indiana law that gay rights advocates say is discriminatory against gay people. Benioff said he has already given an employee who asked to leave Indianapolis due to the law a relocation package worth $50,000. [The Huffington Post]

$2.4 million

One trader made $2.4 million in less than a half hour with two well-timed options transactions Friday. The individual bought $110,530 worth of options on Altera on tweeted news Intel was considering buying the company. As the rest of the market caught on to the news, the value of those options increased 2,200 percent. [CNBC]

13 million tourists
Croatia is seeing a bump in tourism, perhaps thanks to HBO’s “Game of Thrones,” which films its King’s Landing scenes there. There were 13 million visitors last year, up 6 percent over the previous year. The small European nation is hoping to see a similar effect to what New Zealand enjoyed thanks to Peter Jackson’s successful “Lord of the Rings” and godawful “Hobbit” films. [Bloomberg Business]

$1 billion lawsuit

Johns Hopkins University is being sued by over 780 people over human experimentation conducted on over 5,500 Guatemalans in the 1940s. Per Buzzfeed, the lawsuit claims that Johns Hopkins “infected over a thousand Guatemalans with syphilis and other STDS without their knowledge or consent.” [Buzzfeed]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
7 percent easier

We’re that much closer to Ironman: a lightweight exoskeleton has been developed that reduces by 7 percent the amount of energy it takes to walk. [Fusion]


10 percent of revenues

The European Union is reportedly going to initiate an anti-trust suit against Google. Should the European Commission find fault with the company, Google could be fined up to 10 percent of revenue — more than $6 billion, judging by Google’s revenue last year. [Business Insider]

11 convictions
Eleven teachers and administrators from the Atlanta school system were convicted on racketeering charges after faking standardized test results in order to get bonuses or keep their jobs. The educators were accused of feeding answers and correcting the exams. [Associated Press]

25 percent reduction

California Gov. Jerry Brown has instituted mandatory water restrictions for the state, with an executive order that cuts water use by 25 percent reduction and requires new homes have efficient irrigation systems. [Bloomberg Business]

$99
That’s the reported cost to watch the Mayweather-Pacquiao fight on HD pay-per-view on May 2, which is the highest price for such an event. The highly awaited fight — between arguably the two best boxers of their generation — will also stream in standard definition for only $89 if you feel like watching history on a mediocre stream. [Wall Street Journal]

25,000+ fighters
Experts working for the United Nations estimated that more than 25,000 people have left their home countries to join the Islamic State as fighters. [Associated Press]

316,600 people over 100
As of 2012, there were an estimated 316,600 people who were older than 100 years old still alive. The world’s oldest person just died, and there are now only four people still alive who were born before 1900. [BBC]

$1 million


Sen. Robert Menendez, who represents the greatest state of New Jersey, was indicted by a grand jury on 14 counts including bribery and conspiracy. The senator allegedly accepted over $1 million in gifts from a Dr. Salomon Melgen. [Associated Press]

$5.4 million in illicit profits
The federal government is suing Kraft Foods and Mondelez — which used to be a single company — for violating commodity trading rules. The company allegedly made large purchases in wheat futures in 2011 with the intent to convince sellers it would require less in the future, driving the price down. The company made $5.4 million from the trading. [New York Times Dealbook]

30 million pairs of Crocs
Crocs might be making a comeback. The company is restructuring with fewer styles and stores and a larger emphasis on the core clog. Last year 30 million pairs were sold. A cursory survey of tourists in Times Square last night convinced me this must be an underestimation. [Bloomberg Business]


Our long national nightmare is over: happy day after April Fools’ day. Together, let’s learn to trust again. 
If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
$1
Cablevision plans to offer to buy the New York Daily News for $1, Reuters reports. The daily loses $30 million annually. The New York Post is going to have a field day with this. [Reuters]

4 witnesses

The defense of alleged Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev rested Tuesday after calling only four witnesses. He has admitted guilt in the attacks, but his attorneys are trying to avoid the death penalty for the 21 year-old. [Associated Press]


6, 7, 8 or 9
College basketball players are not allowed to wear the numerals 6, 7, 8 or 9 on their jersey. That leaves a crunch for uniform numbers, since 40 percent of numbers less than 60 aren’t allowed, and every number 60 and above might as well not exist. [The New York Times]

20 percent down
Viewership of MSNBC was down 20 percent from the first quarter of last year. The 9 to 11 a.m. hours had the worst ratings since 1999. [AdWeek]


22 drug sentences
Barack Obama commuted 22 drug sentences. Eight of the inmates were serving life sentences, and this more than doubles the number of commuted sentences the president has issued during his presidency. He’s now given a commutation to 0.3 percent of all prisoners who’ve sought one. [FiveThirtyEight]

25 years

Robin Williams, who died last year, forbade the use of his likeness for 25 years following his death. There will be no hologram Mrs. Doubtfire. [The Hollywood Reporter]

66 percent
Women are working through their first pregnancies more than they did before the Pregnancy Discrimination Act. 66 percent of mothers who gave birth to their first child from 2006 and 2008 worked while pregnant, versus 44 percent in the early 1960s. [Pew Research Center]

3,208.916 feet

An artist stole the top 1-inch of England’s tallest mountain — Scafell Pike, previously 3,209 feet tall, presumably slightly less now — and people are really upset about it. The small rock fragment is on display in London. [The Telegraph via Boing Boing]

$418 million

Domain-name sales site GoDaddy will have its initial public offering Tuesday and it’s looking to raise $418 million. “www.GoDaddyIPO.com” redirects to GoDaddy, so they’re at least well-prepared. [Bloomberg Business]

7.745 billion bushels

America has so much corn. We have 11 percent more corn stockpiled compared to this time last year, meaning the country has its most bushels — 7.745 billion — since 1987. Prices are down as a result. Now if you’ll excuse me, have to go eat some frosted corn flakes now. They just changed the frosting recipe. Two times the corn syrup, same great taste! [Bloomberg Business]

See you tomorrow, when it’s not April Fools and the internet is back to usual levels of trying to lie to you. If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.









--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
35th place
It’s tax time, the magical time of year when some Americans owe Uncle Sam money, and some lucky others get their interest-free loan to the government returned to them. U.S. income tax rates are, for most Americans, low relative to what people in other countries are taxed. For instance, a U.S. married couple making two times the average wage and who have two kids have a tax rate that’s in 35th place among 39 OECD observed nations. [Pew Research Center]

49 percent

Americans are split on whether businesses that provide wedding services should be allowed to refuse to serve same-sex couples if the business has religious objections to the union. A Pew Research survey found 49 percent of Americans say businesses should not be allowed to refuse to serve a gay wedding, while 47 percent said they should be allowed to refuse services. [Pew Research Center]

63.5 degrees Fahrenheit
Antarctica had it’s warmest recorded day last Tuesday, almost hitting room temperature. [The Independent]


64.1 percent

According to the FBI, that’s the national murder clearance rate in the U.S. In other words, if you get killed, there’s only a two-in-three chance the police will eventually arrest or identify whom they believe did it. That rate was 90 percent in the sixties. [NPR]

$50,000 to $500,000
How much the company HolacracyOne charges companies to serve as consultants as they switch to Holacracy, a management system where, er, you get rid of management. It breaks employees into teams that lead themselves. Shoe company Zappos is one organization adapting it, and needless to say (former) management isn’t super thrilled at the process of being stripped of its titles. [Fast Company]

235,000 ripped-off, minority borrowers

The Justice Department is investigating companies that allegedly targeted minority borrowers with the costliest car loans they offered. When investigating Ally Financial, the government said it estimated that 235,000 minority borrowers paid higher interest rates than white borrowers. [New York Times]


$350,000

The Atlanta Falcons were hit with a $350,000 fine and stripped of a 2016 fifth-round draft pick after it was discovered the team was pumping fake crowd noise into the Georgia Dome over the past two years. When asked why it did it, the franchise insisted it has fans but that they had totally met back at summer camp, that the fans were super hot but, like, lived across the country so you’ll probably never get the chance to meet them; but believe them, the Atlanta Falcons assured those present, the fans are just so into them. At press time, the Atlanta Falcons were offering to show reporters text messages they had received from their fans to prove they totally existed. [ESPN]

$14 million
The amount of money that Meerkat, a live streaming video app that launched several weeks ago, raised in the month it owned the market. But now Meerkat has competition, from Twitter’s Periscope app, and Meerkat isn’t holding up well. [BGR]

$16.9 million
The amount of money New York City speed cameras have charged drivers in the cameras’ first year of operation. Of that, $5.2 million worth of tickets haven’t yet been paid. [Gothamist]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
$19.99
Jay-Z is launching Tidal on Monday, a music streaming service that claims higher resolution music in exchange for a higher-than-industry-standard cost. While competitor Spotify charges $9.99 per month, and future rival Apple was reportedly rebuffed in its attempt to charge an even lower monthly fee, Tidal will charge $19.99 per month. [USA Today]

34 percent
The percentage of Republicans who believe President Barack Obama is an imminent threat to America, according to a Reuters/Ipsos online poll. He’s more threatening to American life than Russian president Vladimir Putin — 25 percent of Republicans said Putin was an imminent threat. [Reuters]

53 percent
After a weekend of basketball, only four teams remain. The University of Kentucky is favored by the FiveThirtyEight model to win it all, with a 53 percent chance. On the women’s side, the University of Connecticut continues to be vastly favored, with an 80 percent chance of taking it home. [FiveThirtyEight]

59,000 ex-bankers

It’s not a great time to be a banker. (Well, relatively speaking.) A data analysis from Reuters found that U.S. and European banks cut 59,000 jobs last year. [Reuters]

$2 million
That’s the total amount of contributions from the Fraternity and Sorority Political Action Committee to about 100 representatives and senators over the past decade. One reason it’s difficult for schools to oversee and rein in fraternities is that the groups are very entrenched in politics and existing power structures. [Chronicle of Higher Education] 

2.8 million barrels
Daily oil output of Iran, down substantially from its peak production in 1974. As relations between the U.S. and Iran approach a thaw — or, I don’t know, a slight defrost, kind of hard to consider what’s going on a thaw — energy companies are salivating at the prospect of drilling there, despite the need for steep investments to get production where it could be. [Bloomberg Business]


$54 million

DreamWorks Animation finally got a win, as “Home” lead the box office this weekend with $54 million domestically. [Buzzfeed]

$350 million

One initial estimate of the total amount the Germanwings airline will have to pay out to families of those killed in last week’s crash. [New York Times]


$4.5 billion
New drugs to treat Hepatitis C are costing Medicare a fortune. The drugs can cost $1,000 per day, and last year Medicare spent $4.5 billion on the new drugs, up from $286 million the previous year on the existing drugs. [ProPublica]

$5.4 billion

Legislators and the Governor have reportedly figured out the New York State budget! There isn’t a final number yet, but a deal has reportedly been cut on how to divvy up the $5.4 billion in settlement money acquired from financial institutions involved in the 2008 financial crisis. [New York Times]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this as an email newsletter, please subscribe.
Fewer than 5 percent
Percentage of AWOL members of the military who received a court-martial for desertion at the height of the Iraq war. Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl has been charged with desertion and “misbehavior before the enemy.” [New York Magazine]

14 percent

Lobbyists are required to file disclosure reports with the federal government. One thing they’re supposed to report is former positions held within the government. A Government Accountability Office study found that 14 percent of reports didn’t disclose one or more formerly held positions. [GAO, via Brian Fung]


15 paid days off
Tech giant Microsoft is requiring many of its contractors and vendors to provide 15 paid days off to their employees who do work for Microsoft. It is unclear if this applies to Clippy, who has been on administrative leave for more than a decade. [The Upshot]


17 working drones
The Federal Bureau of Investigation has a fleet of 17 unmanned aircraft but only two people capable of flying them. [The Verge]

60 percent to 70 percent
When “The Daily Show” adopted a new system from a company called SnapStream that makes it easier to put together montages of TV clips from cable news and other networks, it reportedly reduced editing workloads by 60 percent to 70 percent. [Splitsider]

$250 per kilowatt-hour

That’s how far the cost of vehicle batteries must fall for electric cars to compete with gasoline-powered cars in the U.S., according to a new study. [The Carbon Brief]

400 percent
Increase in spending on alcohol advertisements between 1971 and 2011. Alcohol consumption trends have remained largely unchanged. [AdWeek]



60,000 feet

Mark Zuckerberg announced a successful test flight of an unmanned aircraft designed to expand Internet access on the ground. According to the billionaire Facebook founder, the final design will be “able to stay at altitudes of more than 60,000 feet for months at a time.” Perhaps Facebook can lend the FBI a hand? [Facebook]
Wait, scratch that — that sounds like a terrible collaboration.

$40 million
American Apparel founder Dov Charney was fired from his position as CEO last year after being accused of sexual harassment and misuse of funds. He is now seeking $40 million in damages from the V-Neck T-Shirt empire. It’s unclear if he wants the $40 million to be delivered in bills derived from 100 percent fine-gauge, preshrunk combed cotton with a lightweight yet extra soft hand feel and printed in a sweatshop-free environment, yet I can only assume. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the Significant Digits newsletter — be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.





