
You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
12
Ever wonder what the Madden rating would be if an average schlub off the street played in the NFL? I did, and I also happen to be an average schlub off the street. The answer, in my case, was 12 out of 99. [FiveThirtyEight]

22 percent
Despite (or perhaps because of) allegations that Bill O’Reilly may have misrepresented reporting he did in Argentina, the ratings for his show “The O’Reilly Factor” were up 22 percent in February, making it the top cable news show for 171 consecutive months. [AdWeek]

30 percent
Federal funding comprised 30 percent of state revenues in the 2013 fiscal year, down from 35.5 percent in fiscal year 2010. [The Washington Post]

52 percent
52 percent of Obamacare enrollees paying their taxes through H&R Block had to pay back some of their tax credit, with $530 on average being paid back to the government because their subsidies were too high. [H&R Block]

1,500 miles
The Port Authority is considering dropping a rule that limits flights out of LaGuardia Airport to fewer than 1,500 miles. This would open up the airport to flights to the west coast, and is favored by stakeholders like Delta Airlines who use the dumpster fire of a transit facility for flights out of New York. [The Wall Street Journal]

80,000 seats
The California city Inglewood approved plans to build an 80,000-seat NFL stadium at the cost of $1.86 billion. [Los Angeles Times]

$4.8 million
Lots of disclosures on this simple bit of news: Disney* will drop the Boy Scouts of America** from its Voluntears program*** in 2015. This means the company won’t match or donate to the BSA because of its anti-gay policies. In 2010, Disney gave $4.8 million to the scouts. [Boing Boing]
* Disney owns FiveThirtyEight by the transitive property.
** I was in the Boy Scouts for years.
*** A program I have not taken advantage of, but could.

$20 million
RadioShack, which has filed for bankruptcy, will attempt to sell its milquetoast and uninspiring name and trademarks. Bids for the brand’s name begin at $20 million, a price I assume was set by someone who has never asked an average American how she feels about “RadioShack.” [Bloomberg Business]

$23,581,250
Fines issued by speeding cameras in the city of New York in 2014. [WNYC]

12 billion suns
A giant black hole has been discovered, reportedly with the mass of 12 billion suns. I just re-watched “Interstellar” so this seems like the kind of thing that could lead to a real emotional revelation for whoever’s lucky enough to go near it. [National Geographic]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. I finally did, and since then I’ve lost 5 pounds, slept better and felt more confident at work. Results not guaranteed.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.


--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
0.86 percent
Go ahead, claim that “home office” as a business expense*: the IRS only audited 0.86 percent of individual tax returns last year, the lowest rate in 10 years. However, if you make more than a million, the rate is 7.5 percent, so make sure you triple check whether or not you’re a millionaire before you set up your home office. [Bloomberg Business]

*DO NOT TAKE TAX ADVICE FROM ME!

3 states
Weed’s legal in Alaska as of yesterday, making it the third state to do so. Call me when one of you figure out how to make an Orca into a functioning bowl. [NBC News]

$9.00

JP Morgan did $9 worth of business with Iran last year, according to documents submitted to the SEC. The largest bank in the United States went to comically laborious lengths to explain the $9 transaction in its 10-K, the result of two bank transfer fees on behalf of a client. [Business Insider]

43 categories
My colleague Neil Paine published a deep dive into how the folks behind Madden determine the 43 unique category ratings for roughly 2,600 NFL players. [FiveThirtyEight]

45.3 percent
Chicago mayor and profanity innovator Rahm Emanuel failed to win more than 50 percent of the vote in Chicago’s mayoral election. He will have to win a runoff in April against challenger Jesus Garcia in order to maintain the mayoralty of America’s premier second city. [Chicago Sun Times]


176 square feet
Average space per office worker in 2012, down from 225 square feet in 2010. Thankfully many of us were prepared for the new status quo by those really small desks in high school. [The New York Times]

500 bricks
The people behind “The Lego Movie” doled out 20 faux Oscars at the ceremony on Sunday. It took 500 bricks to build one of them. Everything is awesome. [CNET]

$50,000


Taylor Swift donated $50,000 to New York City schools, royalties from her song “Welcome to New York.” More to come, reportedly. [The New York Times]



$100 million
Last year Actavis, a generically named pharmaecutical company, bought Allergan, another generically named pharmaceutical company, for $65 billion. Since that deal went down, there’s the somewhat awkward situation of a superfluous CEO, Allergan’s David Pyott, walking around. Rather than settle this the old fashioned way — two chief executive officers enter the thunderdome, one leaves — Actavis is probably going to pay Pyott $100 million to get fired. [Bloomberg Business]

$2 billion
HP, the one-time important and influential computing company, will split into two separate companies in three months, one for its enterprise and business products and another for its computer and printer businesses. The cost of the split, we learned Tuesday, will be about $2 billion. [Business Insider]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. I finally did, and since then I’ve lost 5 pounds, slept better and felt more confident at work. Results not guaranteed.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.







--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
2.045 times as large
The market cap of the largest publicly traded U.S. company (Apple) is for the first time in 30 years more than twice the size of the market cap of the runner up (Exxon Mobil Corp.). Apple’s cap is $765 billion, Exxon’s is $374 billion. [Wall Street Journal]


$9.60
Median hourly wage for a home health aide. Following the lead of fast food workers, healthcare aides are now building their own campaign to raise their minimum wage to $15 per hour. [USA Today]

19 manatees
ZERO DARK MANATEE: Last night, authorities in Florida rescued 19 manatees that were stuck in a storm drain. Shockingly, animals sometimes referred to as a “sea cow” were not clever enough to get themselves out. [Florida Today]



68 days

That’s how long one study estimates people could survive on Mars if sent by Mars One, a non-profit organization trying to get astronauts there in the next 20 years. Experts say that Mars One’s plan underestimates the difficulty of sending humans to the Red Planet.[Buzzfeed]

80 percent
Should a bill to fund the Department of Homeland security fail to make it into law, 30,000 employees will be furloughed. 80 percent of the DHS workforce is deemed essential to national security, yet as a person who has been through TSA screening that feels like a bit much. [USA Today]

$2,500

A labradoodle — a cross between a poodle and a labrador retriever — can sell for between $2,500 and $3,000, much more than a lab or a poodle (which can go for $1,000 to $2,000). [The Baffler]


18,000 text messages

The number of SMS requests a new startup called Magic received in a single day — just three days after launching. Magic is a delivery service that does all the work of finding an item for you, and, only a few days in, it can barely keep up with the demand. [Mashable]


36.6 million viewers
People weren’t as into the Oscars this year as they were in the past. Ratings dropped 16 percent from last year. [Entertainment Weekly]

$1.92 billion
Apple is building data centers in Europe that will be powered entirely by renewable energy, costing the company $1.92 billion. [Associated Press]

$3.1 billion

Profits from the sale of OxyContin for manufacturer Perdue Pharma in 2010. Oxy exploded in popularity across the country since its introduction in 1996, fueling an opiate epidemic that’s still ongoing. [Pacific Standard]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. I finally did, and since then I’ve lost 5 pounds, slept better and felt more confident at work. Results not guaranteed.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
1.7 percent
When Patricia Arquette won her Oscar for supporting actress Sunday night, she called for wage equality in her acceptance speech. From 2004 to 2013, the gap between what men make and what women make closed by only 1.7 percent. [Fusion]

4 Oscars
“Birdman” took home the Academy Award for best picture last night, and it won other trophies for original screenplay, direction and cinematography. It won the most Oscars on the night, but tied with “The Grand Budapest Hotel,” which won four prizes in score, costume design, production design and makeup/hairstyling. [USA Today]

4.6 percent

Percentage of major studio films directed by women in 2014 [Los Angeles Times]


62 cases

There’s been substantial scrutiny of policies at the Rikers Island correctional facility, which was the subject of a U.S. attorney’s report about brutality there this past summer. Since the release of that report in August, there have been 62 cases of inmates sustaining serious injuries from corrections officers, The New York Times found. [The New York Times]


68 percent female
While a lot of the original web “culture” was formed by white dudes, that’s changed since new mobile technology has opened up the space to other groups. Instagram users, for instance, are reportedly 68 percent female. [Kernel Magazine]

$105
Cost for a day pass to the Magic Kingdom in Orlando as of Sunday, up from $99. It’s thought to be the first place in the theme park biz to jump above a hundred. Fun fact/full disclosure: this website is owned by Disney, which does, indeed, own Disney World. [Reuters]

400 mg per day
Drinking five cups of coffee per day (or about 400 milligrams) has been linked to lower risk of heart disease and diabetes. People who drink more see more health benefits. In related news, that makes me immortal. [Washington Post]


219,382 backers

A card game called “Exploding Kittens” has become the most popular Kickstarter project ever, accumulating more than $8.7 million from over 200,000 backers. [Wired]

$1 billion
While Massachusetts’s snow removal budget has already been increased to $125 million from $50 million, all of its snow may cost the state $1 billion in lost economic activity when all is said and done. [Washington Post]


$6.04 billion
Apple’s annual R&D costs. The company has a mighty war chest of $178 billion in cash, which may be prompting the smartphone juggernaut to move into the automotive space. [Bloomberg Business]

If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. I finally did, and since then I’ve lost 5 pounds, slept better and felt more confident at work. Results not guaranteed.
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.








--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
1-in-4 IPOs
While a lot has been made of the potential for a tech bubble, flying under the radar is the possibility of a biotech bubble. One-in-four initial public offerings in 2014 were biotech firms, and medical device and biotech firms raised $8.6 billion in private funding last year. Many of these companies need to pass regulatory and scientific hurdles, so they’re a hell of a gamble. My conservative, sandwich-heavy portfolio is a much safer play. [Quartz]


6 feet
A new report from the New York City Panel on Climate Change says sea levels could rise by as much as six feet by 2100 in the worst-case scenario. The panel’s previous worst-case estimate was 2-4 feet. [Scientific American]

$9 per hour
Wal-Mart, the largest retailer on Earth, announced it will raise the minimum wage of its U.S. employees to $9 per hour. It is the latest sign the growing economy may finally be boosting the pay of low-wage workers. [FiveThirtyEight]

24.8 percent

Percentage of uninsured Americans with incomes above the poverty line who said they had heard nothing about a tax penalty next year for those who remain uninsured, a part of the Affordable Care Act. [Urban Institute]

26 percent
Increase in the average weight of pickup trucks since 2000. The trend toward bigger pickups has been driven, in part, by Americans liking big trucks — pretty sure that’s in the constitution somewhere. But federal regulations, which allow bigger vehicles to be less fuel-efficient, have also played a role. [Bloomberg Business]

38 percent
Percent of Americans who have passports, up from 3 percent in 1989. This, if anything, means this country has become less patriotic — I had a layover in Canada once when I was 10, and I still feel undeserving to call myself an American. [Dadaviz]

385 percent
This year’s top Oscar nominees — those contending for best picture, best director, best actor and best actress — saw their illegal download rate increase an average of 385 percent in the 30 days after nominations were announced. “This is why the fifth amendment exists,” exclaimed a local lifestyle writer. [Bloomberg Business]


1,009 weeks
A Bollywood rom-com,”Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge,” just wrapped up the longest theatrical run ever, 1,009 weeks at the Maratha Mandir. The run began in October 1995. That’s as if “Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls” had been in a theater since its premiere. [Yahoo News]

$50,000

Approximate cost to book Salt-N-Pepa for your wedding, bar mitzvah or particularly awesome funeral. There’s a whole cottage industry around booking elapsed acts from the 1990s for private events. [Bloomberg Business]


If you haven’t already, you really need to sign up for the newsletter to be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. I finally did, and since then I’ve lost 5 pounds, sleep better and feel more confident at work. Results not guaranteed. 
And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
19 stunt people

There’s been a push for the Academy Awards to create a technical award for Hollywood stunt performers for decades, but the lobby is somewhat hampered by numbers: Only 19 of the roughly 6,000 members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences were stunt people in 2011. [A.V Club]


76 percent of Republicans
George W. Bush left the White House with abysmal approval ratings, but even then, a majority of Republicans approved of his foreign policy performance. Now, as Jeb Bush gears up for a presidential run sounding a lot like his brother on foreign policy, the GOP remains plenty hawkish; 76 percent of Republicans think military force will be needed to prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon. [FiveThirtyEight]

73 companies
Number of startups with a valuation over $1 billion according to venture capitalists. Of the 73 companies, 23 make software, 13 work in e-commerce and 13 are consumer-oriented Internet services. [The Wall Street Journal]

450 calories per slice
Little Caesars has unveiled a new pizza with 3.5 feet of bacon wrapped around its crust. At 450 calories per slice, the crust is beautiful and terrible as the morning and the night, the pie as fair as the sea and the sun and the snow upon the mountain, dreadful as the storm and the lightning, stronger than the foundations of the earth! All shall love it and despair! It costs $12. [USA Today]

800 acts of emotional manipulation and casual cruelty
It seems like every year some college or university mistakenly tells a bunch of rejected applicants that they’ve been accepted. This year, it was Carnegie Mellon University. The school, which is supposed to be good at tech, e-mailed 800 anxious applicants on Monday to tell them they were accepted into a master’s program in computer science. They were not. [Bloomberg Business]

$1,930.60

That was the average price on the secondary market for tickets to the Duke vs. University of North Carolina basketball game last night. [Forbes]

50,000 bitcoins

The U.S. government will auction off roughly $12 million worth of the digital currency bitcoin seized in the bust of the Silk Road, a drug-trafficking website. [The New York Times]



$300,000
VICE founder Shane Smith is reported to have dropped $300,000 on a single dinner in Las Vegas. There are conflicting accounts of the size of the party that racked up the mighty bill; reports range from 12 to 25 people. What could they possibly have ordered? I mean, for $300,000 I would probably let someone “Most Dangerous Game” me. [Bloomberg Business]

700,000 cartons of cigarettes
New York (state and city) brought a lawsuit against UPS on Wednesday for allegedly shipping 700,000 cartons of cigarettes from Native American land upstate, where tobacco is not taxed, to the rest of the state. This meant about $35 million in lost tax revenue. [Huffington Post]


Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe. 
11.3 percent
The share of student loans at least 90 days overdue hit 11.3 percent at the end of last year, with $1.16 trillion in student borrowing overall. [Associated Press]

39 times per week
In the U.S., a foreign object is left inside a patient after surgery 39 times per week. My research found no evidence any of these objects are adamantium skeletons — they are sponges, towels, etc. — so this seems like an unconditionally bad thing. [Wall Street Journal]

70 episodes

John Oliver, the former-Daily Show correspondent turned late-night host, has signed a two-season deal with HBO. The popular program has been green-lit for two more 35-episode seasons, presumably ending speculation about Oliver taking “The Daily Show” chair. [Los Angeles Times]

2,100.34

The S&P 500 reached a new all-time high, exceeding 2,100 points for the first time following good news out of Greece and a rise in technology shares. Congratulations, America, for passing an arbitrary number that is divisible by some power of 10 — the bread-and-butter of all financial news. [Bloomberg Business]


5,788 votes
Sen. Susan Collins of Maine has the best attendance record in the Senate, with 5,788 votes cast and zero missed. The same cannot be said of several of her colleagues. Sen. Marco Rubio leads the no-show pack with 8.3 percent of votes missed. [Vocativ]

180,000 bed bug bites
Biologist Regine Gries has endured more than 180,000 bed bug bites in an attempt to win money on Fear Factor find the pheromones that attract the horrible insects. The research may help destroy the pest once and for all, but I still think my plan is better. [CBS New York]

211,275
The number of people worldwide worth more than $30 million in 2014. [Vice]

$1.97 million
The U.S. paid the government of the Philippines $1.97 million after a particularly botched parking job, when a Navy mineswpeeper destroyed 25,240 square feet of coral reef in 2013. [Associated Press]

3.2 billion years

Life may have appeared on earth a billion years earlier than previously believed. Evidence of widespread nitrogen-processing organisms appears to have been found in new rock samples from that time period. [Washington Post]

$19 billion

That’s how much Snapchat thinks it’s worth. This valuation may self-destruct in 10 seconds. [Bloomberg Business]



That was fun, right? Imagine how fun it would be if you didn’t have to click a thing in an Internet browser to get here. Now we’re talking, right? 
And now that dream is a reality: Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
5th place

Thomas Jefferson would be the first to get dynamited off Mount Rushmore if we ever get around to throwing Franklin D. Roosevelt up there. Historians, according to an average of three recent surveys, rank FDR as the No. 1 president. Jefferson is fifth, behind FDR, Abraham Lincoln, George Washington and Theodore Roosevelt. [FiveThirtyEight]

10 inches

The Washington Monument just got 10 inches shorter, thrilling people who are inherently skeptical of tour guides. The obelisk — originally recorded as a stalwart 555 feet, 5.125 inches — is instead a puny and utterly laughable 554 feet, 7.344 inches. The monument hasn’t actually shrunk, though. The measurers just started the tape measure in a different place. [Chicago Tribune]

30 percent
Sierra Leone did not properly account for how it spent $5.7 million in Ebola aid, about 30 percent of overall funds, according to a new report. [BBC]

37 years in prison
South Carolina prison officials have doled out hundreds of disciplinary actions against inmates for using social media, primarily Facebook. One inmate got 37 years in isolation. [Electronic Frontier Foundation]

100 people
Mars One, which accepted more than 200,000 applications for a one-way trip to Mars, has selected 100 “lucky” people who are still in the running for a doomed flight toward that barren red hellscape populated entirely by robots. [Washington Post]

170,000 counts
A 93-year old German man who allegedly worked at Auschwitz has been charged with 170,000 counts of accessory to murder. [Associated Press]

$10 million
An arbitration panel decided Lance Armstrong owes $10 million to SCA Promotions, which sued Armstrong after the cyclist was found to have used PEDs. [Los Angeles Times]

$81.7 million

“Fifty Shades of Grey” won the box office this weekend with an $81.7 million haul, beating analyst expectations and putting it only behind “The Passion of the Christ” when it comes to February opening weekends. [Business Insider]


$300 million
Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker — a potential 2016 presidential candidate — has submitted a budget proposal to shave $300 million from the state’s university system in 2 years, a 13 percent cut. [Washington Post]

$350 million
Jon Stewart’s announcement that he’s leaving “The Daily Show” cost parent company Viacom $350 million in value as its stock dropped 1.5 percent. [The Wrap]


Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
11 days

Great job, everybody! People have kept it together in New York City and did not kill a fellow human since Feb. 1. In fairness, even if someone wanted to (and break the 11-day record-setting streak), it would probably be too much work with all this cold and ice. [New York Daily News]


62nd
Professional golfer Tiger Woods’s world ranking after a rough 2014 and a bad start to 2015. That’s his lowest since he went pro. [CNN]

53 percent of voters

For the first time, a majority of New Jersey voters have an unfavorable view of Republican Gov. Chris Christie. In my expert opinion as FiveThirtyEight’s New Jersey resident, the guy had it coming after that Dallas Cowboys crap. [Reuters]

$62.15 per barrel

A survey of economists by The Wall Street Journal found the consensus projection for the price of crude oil by December is $62.15 per barrel. Then again, the conventional wisdom isn’t all it’s cracked up to be. [The Wall Street Journal]


60,000 deaths per year
Smoking — which is, believe it or not, dangerous — was linked to five more diseases in a new study, specifically kidney, intestinal, heart and lung ailments. In the U.S., the diseases would add 60,000 people to smoking’s death toll annually. [The New York Times]

$3,327,757
A tabletop game based on the “Conan the Barbarian” series has just wrapped up the largest-ever Kickstarter funding round for a board game in the crowdfunder’s history. [The Escapist]

12.7 million metric tons
Humanity is not great at getting rid of garbage. The simplest solution is often to just dump it in the ocean. Scientists estimate that 12.7 million metric tons of plastic was dumped in the ocean in 2010, making for a lot of very sad dolphins (presumably). You know the Great Pyramid of Giza? That really big one? Those 12.7 million metric tons are double the weight of that thing. [Ars Technica]

21 million
The number of adults in the U.S. who practiced some form of yoga in 2012, double the number from 2002. [National Institutes of Health]

$44 million
Colorado scored $44 million in tax revenue from recreational marijuana last year, $25 million less than expected. The Colorado marijuana industry is basically like the college roommate who overpromises on rent: To make up for the shortfall, they’re definitely going to try to sell more weed. [The Daily Beast]


$40 billion

After intervention from France and Germany, there’s a new cease-fire scheduled for Sunday in Ukraine. Ukraine will also see a $40 billion aid package as part of the deal. [NPR]

Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.






--------------------------------


You’re reading Significant Digits, a daily digest of the telling numbers tucked inside the news. To receive this newsletter in your inbox, subscribe.
3 winners
Wednesday night’s Powerball lottery drawing had three winning tickets. The final advertised jackpot of $564 million was the fifth-biggest in U.S. history. Earlier Wednesday, when the jackpot was estimated to be $500 million, I wrote there was a 67 percent chance at least one person would win. [ABC News]

4 reactors
After the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi disaster, Japan shut down all its nuclear reactors. On Wednesday, two of those reactors were green-lit to resume generation, joining two reactors already reauthorized to resume. That means there will still be 44 idle commercial reactors. [Kyodo News]

8 percent ABV
Bud Light has created three new monstrosities known as MIXXTAILS, beverages that are 8 percent alcohol by volume and flavored to taste like a cocktail. Our nation has still not recovered from the Four Loko craze. [Eater]

15 to 60 minutes

SpaceX on Wednesday launched a satellite designed to monitor solar storms. The satellite is called Dscovr — presumably losing a couple of vowels to drop weight and save on fuel costs — and can give Earth between 15 and 60 minutes’ notice if an electromagnetic wave of energy ejected from the sun is poised to hit us and cause mass communication and electrical disruption. So that’s nice. [The New York Times]


22 percent

Do you keep a motion tracker on your wrist? I used to, but then I lost it while inebriated, during a FitBit-throwing contest that I totally won. It turns out I may have made the right call; the device might have been logging more steps than I took. Researchers have found there is up to a 22 percent difference between the number of steps a wristband logs and the number someone takes. [Mother Jones]

45 percent
According to the National Science Foundation, 45 percent of Americans believe in astrology, up from 32 percent in 2006. I blame the “Battlestar Galactica” reboot. [The Washington Post]

75 percent

There’s a surprising amount of work that goes into perfect popcorn. We’ve figured out the ideal moisture content, weight and shape for kernels, and since 1950 have cut the unpopped kernel rate by 75 percent. [Los Angeles Times]


9,834 Teslas
Tesla, the electric car manufacturer, moved 9,834 vehicles in the fourth quarter 0f 2014, missing expectations of analysts and internal goals. The company announced it intends to move 55,000 of its Model S and Model X vehicles in 2015. [Bloomberg Business]

60,000 tons of salt

Boston, the frozen tundra that drivers eventually hit when they miss their exit to New York, has dumped 60,000 tons of salt onto its roads after this season’s unrelenting snowfall. The city that was known for dumping its sewage into its harbor is naturally considering dumping its snow into its harbor. When all you’ve got is a hammer, everything looks like a nail. [Popular Science]

$200 million
The amount of Russian money invested in condominiums in New York City’s Time Warner Center. The New York Times identified 20 such condos bought by Russians or citizens of the former Soviet bloc. This is part of a larger trend of foreign investment paying top dollar for the city’s real estate. [The New York Times]

Sign up for the newsletter and be the first to learn about the numbers behind the news. And, as always, if you see a significant digit in the wild, tweet it to me @WaltHickey.




